

=== Introduction ===


--- Course Structure ---

Hello students, a warm welcome to our Enterprise Architecture Practitioner course using the standard
10th edition.
The aim of this course is to teach you the detailed content of the TOGAF standard and prepare you for
the TOGAF Enterprise Architecture Part two exam to reach the Toga of Enterprise Architecture Practitioner
Certification.
This course is structured in nine sections.
The first section is this introduction.
We will guide you through the course structure, introduce ourselves and give you information about
the Toga certification program.
We then start with the basics of enterprise architecture by explaining the TOGAF core concepts.
We will teach about Enterprise architecture, landscape architecture level and states and the digital
enterprise.
Then we devote our time to the heart of the talk of standard, the architecture development method.
We go through each phase, its inputs and outputs, as well as the individual steps and approaches.
We also address your role as an enterprise Architecture practitioner.
In this section we really go into detail.
It won't be easy, so buckle up.
In the fourth section we take a look at adme techniques.
However, we will also discuss many of the TOGAF techniques in section three within the corresponding
phase.
Section five is all about architecture content.
You will learn about the architecture, repository and building blocks, views and viewpoints, as well
as the content framework and the enterprise metamodel.
Afterwards, we will look at the topic of Enterprise Architecture capability and delve deeper into architecture
governance.
Section seven is dedicated to the Enterprise Security architecture, and in section eight we give you
tips and tricks on how to master the exam.
You will learn about exam preparation, time management, question analysis and answer selection.
Finally, we summarized the next steps to take the TOGAF Enterprise Architecture Part two exam and obtain
the TOGAF Practitioner Certification.
I hope you all enjoy.

--- Course Instructors ---

Hi there.
Toby here.
I'm happy to be one out of two teachers for your Enterprise Architecture Practitioner course.
With the talk of standard 10th edition.
I'm an expert in Enterprise Architecture management and have a master's degree in Mechanical Engineering
since 2019.
I'm a managing partner at Palladio Consulting, a consulting boutique specialized in enterprise architecture
management.
I am Toga certified, a certified business analyst and Certified Scrum Master.
I've been doing Enterprise Architecture management since 2016 for several leading German automotive
groups, medium sized companies and government organizations.
My personal interests are my family.
I'm a father of two daughters, a board game geek, and I enjoy to go hiking in the mountains.
All right, see you in class and happy learning.
Hi.
This is me, Christopher.
I'm glad to be your instructor for Enterprise Architecture with the latest edition of the TOGAF standard.
I earned a PhD in computer science more than ten years ago, researching an enterprise architecture
management.
In 2019, we founded Palladio, a consulting company focusing on the alignment of business and IT besides
TOGAF.
I hold several certifications in enterprise Modeling, IT governance, and IT Service Management as
my managing partner, Tobias and father of two young kids.
Other than business and IT projects, I like sports, outdoors and writing.
So enough about myself.
Let's start with the open Group architecture framework.


=== TOGAF Core Concepts ===


--- Certification Program ---

Reaching the top of enterprise architecture.
Practitioner certification requires the foundation certification.
You have already taken the TOGAF part one exam, so you are familiar with the multiple choice approach
of The Open Group.
However, the TOGAF part two exam is a bit different.
The test validates that in addition to knowledge and comprehension, you are able to analyze and apply
knowledge of the TOGAF standard 10th edition.
It consists of eight complex, single choice, scenario based questions.
There is one best answer scoring five points, second best answer scoring three points, and third best
answer with one point and a distractor with no points.
The exam lasts 90 minutes and you obtain an additional 60 minutes if English is your second language.
In contrast to the part one exam, part two is an open book test.
However, the Open Group's examination providers operate a clean exam room environment, so all applicable
open book reference materials are provided electronically within the examination test.
For the part two exam, two PDF files are provided the Toga fundamental content and the applicable Toga
series guides.
The PDF files are accessible by selecting the reference button from within the exam.
For passing the test, you require 60%, meaning 24 out of 40 points at the minimum.
You find more information on the official website of The Open Group.
Here are a few more facts about the Torgovaya part two exam.
Just like the exam for part one, the exam for part two can also be booked and taken at Pearson Vue
on behalf of The Open Group.
The test takes place in either test centre or remote under controlled conditions.
As mentioned, you receive extra time if you can prove that English is your second language.
Besides then provided electronic copy of the standard, you may may use a dictionary on the right side
of the slide, you find a quick guide to scheduling your exam.
Enough preamble.
Let's get started.


=== Architecture Development Method (ADM) ===


--- Enterprise Architecture Purpose ---

All right, students, let's start with the basics of enterprise architecture and discuss why we are
doing enterprise architecture.
The purpose of enterprise architecture is to guide effective change, to improve the enterprise.
But why?
All enterprises are seeking to improve, whether it is a private company seeking to increase shareholder
value?
A public company seeking to increase efficiency, or a social enterprise seeking to improve its mission
and the enterprise architecture describes the current and future state of the enterprise, where the
future state defines all what must be done to meet the enterprise goal, objective, mission and vision,
and where the gap between the current and future state highlights what must change.
In other words, enterprise architecture defines the scope of improvements and the scope of the improvements
drives everything that is done within the enterprise.
And enterprise architecture helps to address big and little questions about improvement with its concepts,
methods, techniques and frameworks.
But improvement always means change and stakeholder use enterprise architecture to govern the change
required for the improvements.
The first part of governance is to direct change activity, align the change with the optimal path to
realizing the expected value.
The second part of governance is to control the change activity, ensuring the change stays on the optimal
path.
To sum it up, a good EA facilitates effective governance, management, risk management and exploitation
opportunities and therefore guides effective change.


=== ADM Techniques ===


--- Enterprise Architecture Landscape ---

You have just learned that an enterprise architecture guides effective change to improve the enterprise.
One main reason for this is that enterprise architecture describes the current state and a future state,
with the gaps between the states of the enterprise.
You describe these states with architectural representation of assets, and the architecture landscape
is the architectural representation of assets in use or planned by the enterprise at particular points
in time.
But how does an enterprise architecture landscape looks like?
It is not a single detached representation of an architecture.
Rather, an enterprise architecture landscape is described through several connected models fused,
derived from these models, and other useful things like the documented value or the target architecture.
And you as an enterprise architecture practitioner, you document these assets, but you don't do that
in a one big mammoth project.
The landscape is populated over time and through multiple architecture projects.
So most of the time you document and communicate the enterprise architecture landscape using models.
Therefore, you should know the pros and cons of models.
Models are always a trade off between a formal and informal description, and between a description
for a special purpose and a description for a broad purpose.
And models are described with a limited language that requires experience.
So you need to know the language and notation to understand the model.
Another benefit of models are that they allow reuse of description of the enterprise.
Especially formal models and models shed light on aspects of the enterprise, forming a consistent representation
of the parts of the world that must be understood and analyzed.
And last but not least, models facilitate to understand and telling a story for the system being examined,
especially regarding current and target state and change impact.
Now that you know that an enterprise architecture landscape is the architectural representation of assets
in use or planned by the enterprise at particular points in time, and that the enterprise architecture
landscape can be described with models and view.
Let's turn our attention to how you can organize an enterprise architecture landscape.
The Toga standard uses the architecture continuum and architecture levels for organizing the landscape
into a set of related architectures with manageable complexity, defined grouping with appropriate processes,
roles and responsibilities, and defined hierarchies and navigation structures.
Please note each enterprise has an individual model for organizing its architectures.
Let's dive into the first concept for organizing the enterprise architecture landscape the concept of
architecture levels.
Architecture levels divide the enterprise architecture landscape into three levels of granularity the
strategic architecture, the segment architecture, and the capability architecture.
First, the strategic architecture.
A strategic architecture provides an operational and change framework and allows for direction setting
at an executive level.
The strategic architecture covers a large breadth, meaning it covers the enterprise to the full extent
and the level of detail is low, and the time period that is articulated in the target architecture
is long.
In other words, the target architecture is a broader and less detailed architecture that will generally
be valid for longer time periods and can provide a vision for the enterprise that stretches further
into the future.
The second level of granularity is the segment architecture.
A segment architecture provides an operational and change framework and supports direction, setting
and development of architecture roadmaps at a program or portfolio level, and has a medium level of
detail, breadth, and valid time period.
The third level of granularity is the capability architecture.
It is the most detailed architecture level, covering a small breadth of the enterprise.
For instance, just a process or department with a limited valid time period.
A capability architecture provides a change framework and development of architecture roadmaps.
Realizing capability increments.
As you can see in the figure, you can have multiple segment architecture that cover different breadth
and time periods, but all three architectures together cover the same area as the strategic architecture,
just at a higher level of detail.
The same train of thought applies to segment architecture.
Let's talk for a moment about the organizing dimensions that are used to group architectures into strategy,
segment, and capability architecture levels.
The breadth, or so-called subject matter area, is generally the primary organizing characteristics
for describing an architecture.
Landscape architectures are functionally decomposed into a hierarchy of specific subject areas or segments.
The depth is the level of detail of architectures with broader subject areas.
Less detail is needed to ensure that the architecture has a manageable size and complexity.
More specific subject matter areas will generally permit and require more detailed architectures, so
the level of the details should depend on the breadth.
For a specific breadth and depth, and enterprise can create a baseline architecture and a set of target
architecture that stretch into the future.
Broader and less detailed architectures will generally be valid for longer periods of time, and can
provide a vision for the enterprise that stretches further into the future.
Finally, each architecture view will progress through a development cycle where it increases in accuracy
until finally, finally approved.
After approval, an architecture will begin to decrease in accuracy if not actively maintained.
In some cases, recency may be used as an organizing factor for historic architectures.
To sum up, broad and less detailed target architectures are valid for long periods of time.
Turning our attention now to the question how can you develop architectures at different levels?
Remember that changes to the content of the landscape are made only when needed.
You do not change the landscape proactively.
Otherwise, you have invested a lot of time in the development of a landscape which brings no benefit.
And if you need to change the landscape, you initiate an architecture project to do so.
Every architecture project create, refine, refresh, replace, reaffirm, change or populate components
in the landscape and every architecture project covers and develops just enough of the landscape to
serve the open needs of the project.
Therefore, it is important to stick to the scope of what is asked within the request for architecture
work to avoid scope creep for projects that take a very long time and address topics that no one needs,
you also save resources when the architecture project limits information gathering and analysis to the
minimum necessary to address open needs.
And the ADM offers two strategies to develop hierarchies of architectures.
Architectures at different levels can be developed through iterations within a single cycle of the ADM,
and a hierarchy of ADM cycles executed concurrently.
But please note each architecture must sit within a governance hierarchy, and summary architectures
set the direction of narrow and detailed architectures.
In practice, both strategies are combined.
That's it for the architecture levels, the first of two concepts for organizing the enterprise architecture
landscape.
Let's continue with the second concept for organizing the enterprise architecture landscape, the architecture
continuum.
The architecture continuum divides each level of the enterprise architecture landscape by the degree
of abstraction.
The architecture continuum is part of the enterprise continuum, showing the relationships from foundation
elements to organization specific architecture.
It offers a consistent way to define and understand the generic rules, representations, and relationships
in an architecture, including traceability and derivation relationships.
It is a useful tool to discover commonality and eliminate unnecessary redundancy.
On the left side of the architecture continuum, you have generic architectures, meaning a generic
architecture that exists for the industry or businesses of your enterprise, and you can take these
generic architectures from other enterprises and adapt them to the need of your enterprise to create
the specific architecture of your enterprise.
On the right side of the architecture continuum, you have specific architectures that are specific
to your enterprise.
These specific architectures can be abstracted to a generic architecture through generalization that
can then be reused in the future.
Please note the architecture continuum is just a few of the architecture repository and the way of classifying
your architectures as either being very generic or very specific to your enterprise.
That's it for the two concepts for organizing the enterprise architecture landscape, the concept of
architecture levels, and the concept of the architecture continuum.


=== Architecture Content ===


--- Architecture States ---

Now let's talk about architecture states.
Tokayev speaks about different types of architecture depending on the point in time, the approval of
stakeholders, and the realization of value.
As a practitioner, you manage multiple architecture states.
We start with the baseline architecture as current state, acting as a reference for all changes.
And we have the target architecture, which is the future state that stakeholders have approved.
The target hasn't been approved.
We speak of a candidate architecture.
In between, we have one or more transition architectures partially realizing the target.
Lastly, arresting architecture is an unplanned, unplanned state where the enterprise receives value
if all change activity is suspended.
Please note that there is always a baseline architecture, but not necessarily a target, transition
candidate or resting architecture.
For transforming the baseline to the target architecture.
The TOGAF standard suggests the usage of roadmaps.
However, there are different organizational factors that add to the complexity of managing roadmaps
first advancement and changes outside the enterprise's second shared services and dependencies.
Third, collaboration with suppliers and partners.
Fourth multiple geopolitical boundaries.
First, the enterprise architecture team model.
And fix the availability of multiple solutions or announcement of end of life cycle for used products.
The tug of series guides makes recommendations on the management of roadmaps.
The following techniques help you in grouping and comparing roadmaps.
Start with one version that supports the strategy and create a version as necessary.
Focus on the agreed architecture scope, and use the least and absolute necessary information to guide
your choices.
Employ appropriate naming and versioning concepts to your roadmaps.
Employ a standard reference architecture for cross project and cross roadmap analysis, and use the
same planning horizon for candidate architectures to showcase the impact and outcome as well as usage.
Use the same end dates for related roadmaps.
Their further roadmapping techniques, Torgoff advises use an EA repository with a consistent data set,
ensuring the integrity of the current and target state and allowing for the creation of variants.
Use an EA repository tool with the EA team to identify the change.
Make.
Make it intuitive to identify discarded alternatives.
Create and analyze year over year modifications to the architecture.
Pay attention to impact of change.
And last but not least, inject markers to identify unintended suboptimization or deviations from the
roadmap.
Okay, now turn to another topic of the open Group architecture framework.
For medium and large changes within an enterprise, you need the concept of transition architectures.
Transition architectures help to incrementally reach the target architecture.
Thereby, a transition architecture identifies clear targets along the roadmap to realizing the target.
It provides measurable business value and acts as a portfolio milestone for developing transition architectures.
Consider implementation, approach the consolidated gaps, solutions and dependency metrics.
The listing of project and portfolios, as well as the enterprises change capacity and prefer easy activities,
delivering missing capabilities over difficult ones.
The time spans between successive transition architectures can be different.
Okay so far for architecture states.
We move on to the next element of TOGAF.


=== Architecture Capability & Governance ===


--- Digital Enterprise ---

With version ten.
The TOGAF standard also focuses on digital enterprises.
Therefore, The Open Group has created a series guide called using the TOGAF standard in the Digital
Enterprise.
The guide refers to the digital Practitioner Body of Knowledge standard describing the skills needed
for a digital enterprise.
The digital practitioner body of knowledge identifies four contexts for an organisational evolution
to towards a digital enterprise first context, individual founder, second context team, third context
team of teams, and fourth context and during enterprise context are presented as levels where the enterprise
moves from one earlier context to the next level of success.
Change in a context is described as an emergence model, where the knowledge and activity essential
to the levels is presented to prepare for the next level.
Put a toga of Enterprise Architecture part two exam.
You need an overview on the four contexts for of a digital enterprise.
Let's start with the first context of a digital enterprise context one individual and founder.
The situation here is you have minimum essential concerns your enterprise must address to develop and
sustain a basic digital product.
Enterprise architecture.
Key topics are conception of digital value, digital infrastructure and related practices, and agile
development and continuous delivery.
That brings us to the next context.
In context to the digital enterprise, consists of a small team.
This team has a single mission and a cohesive identity, but no need for a lot of overhead.
The E.
Key topics are product management, work execution management and operations management.
As the enterprise grows, we arrive at the third context.
Now the digital enterprise employs many people.
The reason why this context is called teams of teams.
The situation is a number of people and digital products generate complexity.
What are the key topics we have?
The organization and cultural factors.
We have coordination and process mechanisms and we have investment and portfolio consequences of a multi
team structure.
If your business remains successful, you arrive at the last level.
Context for contains the enduring enterprise.
You manage an enterprise that has been successful and is now faced with the realities of operating a
sustainable business over periods of time.
What are your key topics in enterprise architecture?
Governance, risk, security and compliance?
Information management and Architecture and portfolio management.
That's it for the digital enterprise.


=== Enterprise Security Architecture ===


--- Preliminary Phase ---

Okay, students, let's get to the heart of the talk of standard the architecture development method.
The Foundation course has given you a good insight into the individual phases of the ADM.
Now we will go even deeper into the phases.
But before we do that, let me briefly explain what you need to learn.
In addition to the foundation course content, to pass the part two exam, you need to know the steps
of each phase and the required inputs and outputs.
Besides that, there are a few other points you need to learn and we will cover them all.
Interestingly, the preliminary phase is not part of the practitioner curriculum, probably because
the preliminary phase is already taught in detail in the foundation course.
For the sake of completeness, I will repeat this phase in this practitioner course, even though it
is not part of the curriculum.
Let's start.
As you can see, the preliminary phase is preliminary to the ATM cycle.
In this phase, you create the architecture capability of an enterprise, meaning that this phase is
for all preparation and initiation activities required to meet the business directive for a new enterprise
architecture, including the definition of an organization specific architecture framework and the definition
of architecture principles.
The objectives of the preliminary phases are.
To determine the architecture capability desired by the organization, and to establish the architecture
capability so.
Determine and establish to determine the architecture capability.
You review the organizational context for conducting EA.
You identify and scope the elements of the enterprise organizations affected by the architecture capability.
Identify the established frameworks, methods, and processes that intersect with the architecture capability
and establish capability.
Maturity target.
To establish the architecture capability, you define and establish the organizational model for enterprise
architecture.
You define and establish the detailed process and resources for architecture governance.
Select and implement tools that support the architecture capability and define the architecture principles.
As you can see in the preliminary phase, you do everything that is required to do enterprise architecture.
Within an enterprise or short.
You build the architecture capability to two enterprise architecture.
But please note only build up the architecture capabilities to the degree you need them for the specific
architecture work at hand, because you don't get any added value from the capability alone.
If needed, you can extend the architecture capabilities at any time.
Now the question may arise, how do you build the architecture capability of an enterprise?
Let me answer that.
You define where, what, why, who and how you do architecture.
In your enterprise.
You scope the enterprise organizations impacted you, confirm governance and support frameworks, define
and establish enterprise architecture team and organization.
Identify and establish architecture principles.
Tailor the Toga framework and if any other selected architecture frameworks, and develop a strategy
and implementation plan for tools and techniques.
And the approach to build the architecture capability proposed by the TOGAF standard is to define the
enterprise to identify key drivers and elements in the in the organizational context, to define the
requirements for architecture work, to define the architecture principles that will inform any architecture.
Work.
To define the frameworks to be used to define the relationships between management frameworks.
To evaluate the enterprise architecture maturity, and to determine the architecture capability designed
by the organization.
As I said at the beginning, you don't have to do all of this when you build your first foundational
architecture capability, but it's important that you create the first important boundary conditions
for your architecture work, such as the definition of the enterprise.
So much for the preliminary phase.


=== Master the TOGAF EA Part 2 exam ===


--- Phase A: Architecture Vision ---

The architecture.
Vision phase is the initial phase of the Admm, where you create the architecture vision and establish
an architecture project.
Within this phase, you develop a vision of the capabilities and business value to be delivered as a
result of the proposed enterprise architecture, and you obtain approval for a statement of architecture
work that defines a program of work to develop and deploy the architecture outlined in the architecture
vision and to create the architecture vision and an architecture project.
You need information, in particular non-architectural inputs and architectural inputs.
One Non-architectural input is the request for architecture work.
It is an output of the preliminary phase and a high level document that is sent from the sponsoring
to the architecture organization, triggering the start of an architecture development cycle.
Other non architectural inputs are business principles, business objectives and business drivers that
provide context for architectural work by describing the needs and ways of working within the enterprise.
The architectural inputs you can use as information source to create the architecture, vision and establish
the architecture.
Projects are the organizational model for enterprise architecture, the tailored Architecture framework
and the populated architecture repository.
From the organizational model for Enterprise architecture, you get information about the scope of organizations,
the roles and the responsibilities for your architecture team, constraints for your architecture work
and budget requirements.
The Tailored Architecture Framework provides method tools, definitions of deliverables and artifacts,
and architecture principles you need to use.
And the last architectural input is the Populated Architecture repository, where the outputs of previous
architecture projects are stored.
There you can find valuable informations, for example architecture, building blocks and baseline descriptions.
All architecture development needs to start with phase A.
But how do you identify the information necessary to execute phase A and create the architecture vision?
First, you should define the scope of the architecture project.
Ask yourself what problem are you solving?
Think about the landscape you want to develop.
What breadth, depth and which planning horizon do you need for this?
Or in other words, what is the enterprise scope, the level of detail and the time period that needs
to be articulated for the architecture vision to solve the problem?
What is the purpose of the architecture and where in the business cycle will this architecture be used?
Then you should identify the stakeholders who are affected by the scope of the architecture project,
their concerns and associated requirements.
You can explore the Enterprise Architecture repository for superior architecture constraints and guidance,
and create a stakeholder map to be completely clear which stakeholders must be served and what are they
worrying about?
After that, you need to assess the capability of your enterprise Architecture team.
Take a look at your team and confirm the ability of the team to deliver this architecture development
project.
Who are the members of the team?
Does the team have the required experience and skills?
And last but not least, the most important thing you need to obtain key stakeholder agreement on a
summary of the target and the work.
To reach the target, you need to communicate to the key stakeholders how the problem you have been
assigned can be addressed, and the things that need to change to address their concerns and fulfill
their requirements.
The stakeholder and the EA team have to be clear and have to agree on the target, the value of the
scope, and the effort of change.
If the key stakeholders won't agree, they are unlikely to agree.
After you have performed a lot of work detailing what they do not want by communicating with stakeholders
and seeking confirmation, you also ensure that you have not forgotten any important information when
developing the vision or if information is missing, you can still obtain and consider it now.
While you are executing phase A, you may find that you are missing architectural skills or other information.
You can then use Admm iteration cycles to gather these missing pieces.
Are you missing certain viewpoints to address a certain concern of one of your key stakeholders?
Performance architecture capability iteration and go back to the preliminary phase and create that required
capability.
Are you missing principles?
No problem.
Go back to the preliminary phase and enrich the principles catalog with a missing architecture and business
principles.
Don't worry, you will learn more about Admm iteration cycles in later lessons.
But how do you apply face a the architecture vision phase?
Let me first give you an overview of these steps in approach of face A before we do a deep dive into
selected steps.
The architecture vision is part of the deliverable statement of architecture work.
Therefore, you define and document the architecture vision in the statement of architecture work.
The TOGAF standard recommends the following steps.
First, you establish the architecture project, and after that you do the basic activities of a project
and a few architectural specialties.
You identify stakeholders, concerns and business requirements.
You confirm and elaborate business goals, business drivers and constraints, evaluate capabilities.
Assess readiness for business transformation.
Define the scope.
Confirm and elaborate architecture principles, including business principles.
Develop the architecture vision.
Define the target architecture value proposition and KPIs.
Identify the business transformation, risk and mitigation activities.
And finally, you will compose the statement of architecture work from all the developed content and
secure approval for this deliverable.
Let's continue with the approach.
A key success factor for your architecture project is to build a consensus about the architecture vision
with the sponsoring organization.
To do this, you can use the following approach.
Every architecture project starts with a receipt of a request for architecture work.
Then, if not already specified in the request for architecture work, you start scoping your architecture
project.
You define what is in and what is outside the scope of the architecture effort and describe possible
constraints.
After that, you look at the available content generated in the preliminary phase and make sure that
the content is up to date.
You obtain, verify and understand the documented business principles, business goals, strategic drivers,
and architecture principles and make sure that you take this into account when developing the architecture
vision.
And then the architecture work really gets going.
You describe the baseline and target architectures for all four domains on a high level, and define
and document the architecture vision in the statement for architecture work.
Finally, as I said at the beginning, you get the statement of architecture work signed by the sponsoring
organization to build a consensus.
Let's now dig even deeper into the question how to scope the architecture project, identify stakeholders,
the concerns and business requirements, and confirm and elaborate business goals, business drivers,
and constraints.
Within this step defined scope, you need to define what is inside and what is beyond the scope of the
baseline and target architecture you're going to develop.
You do not need to describe the baseline and target architecture at the same level of detail.
In many cases, the baseline is described at a higher level of abstraction.
So more time is available to specify the target in sufficient detail.
So think about that when scoping the architectural effort.
Then you need to scope the breadth of coverage.
What is the full extent of the enterprise, and what part of that extent will this architecting effort
deal with?
For example, you can narrow the scope of an architecture or architecture project by limiting the scope
of consideration to specific organizations, business units, departments, or processes.
Also, scope the architecture domains you want to cover with your architecture project.
You can define and limit the scope of an architecture project by narrowing the four domains business,
data, application, and technology.
Ask yourself in my situation, do I benefit from knowing the technology stack of an application?
If yes, then you need to take a look at the technology architecture.
If no, then it may be sufficient for you to look only at the business processes that are supporting
applications and the data they require.
Also, consider the time period, scope, the extent of the time period aimed at, and the number and
extent of any intermediate time periods.
And think about partitioning characteristics.
Is the scope architecture you are going to develop within one or more architecture partitions?
Maybe there is another enterprise architecture team responsible for the partition you are addressing
and it makes sense to cooperate.
And last but not least, define architectural assets leveraged from the architecture repository created
in previous ADM iterations or assets that assets that are available in the industry, for instance,
frameworks or system models.
Let's continue with a deep dive into the step.
Identify stakeholders concerns and business requirements.
The main purpose of this step is to involve the stakeholders and create a stakeholder map to plan the
stakeholder engagement.
The stakeholder map shows which stakeholders are involved with the engagement, the level of involvement
and the concerns, and the stakeholder map is used to support various outputs of the architecture vision
phase and to identify the concerns and viewpoints that are relevant to this project and documented in
the architecture vision.
The stakeholders that are involved with the project and as a result, from the starting point for a
communication plan and the key roles and responsibilities within the project, which should be included
within the statement of architecture work.
Another key in this step is to consider which architecture, views and viewpoints need to be developed
to satisfy the various stakeholder requirements.
It is important to understand which stakeholders and which views need to be developed in setting the
scope of the architectural effort.
And lastly, in my opinion, one of the most important part of this step.
Extract the business requirements from the stakeholders and document the in scope requirements in the
Architecture Requirements specification and store the out of scope requirements in the Requirements
repository through the requirements Management process to be addressed by another architecture project.
That's it for the step.
Identify stakeholders concerns and business requirements.
Let's continue with the last step from phase A in which we do a deep dive.
This step confirm and elaborate business goals, business drivers and constraints.
In this step, you have to identify the business goals and strategic drivers of the organization.
If the business goals and strategic drivers have already been defined elsewhere within the enterprise,
you have to ensure that the existing definitions are current and clarify any areas of ambiguity.
Otherwise, you have to go back to the originators of the statement of architecture work and work with
them to define these essential items and secure their endorsement by corporate management.
The other important part of this step is to define the constraints that must be dealt with, including
enterprise wide constraints and project specific constraints.
Project specific constraints are constraints for your project, for example, the available time schedule,
and resources.
You may get the enterprise wide constraints from the developed business and architecture principles
from the preliminary phase, or you have to clarify them as part of phase A, an enterprise wide constraint
from an architecture principle could be that you have to use commercial off the shelf products instead
of individual developed software.
All right, students, that's enough for the steps and approach of face A.
Let's take a look at the outcomes and outputs of this phase.
Let us first distinguish between outcome and output.
The outcome is what you have achieved with the face.
The output is what you have generated during the face, for instance documented deliverables and artifacts.
So what do you achieve with the face?
A architecture vision.
You create a sufficient documentation to get permission to proceed to develop the target architecture,
to prove out a summary target.
And you get knowledge, knowledge about the scope of the problem being addressed, the stakeholders
and their concerns that are fundamental to the problem as well as their priorities and preferences.
You get knowledge about the architecture vision as a summary answer to the stated problem that is acceptable
to the stakeholders.
And lastly, you know the value of the architecture vision.
But what are the outputs of the architecture vision phase?
This slide provides an overview.
We will make a deep dive into the most important ones the statement of architecture work, the architecture,
vision and the communication plan.
The statement of architecture work is a document as response to the request for architecture work.
It should describe an overall plan to address the requests for work, and propose how solutions to the
problems that have been identified will be addressed through the architecture process.
Therefore, it defines the scope and approach being used for an architecture development cycle.
Effectively, it is a contract between the architecting organization and the sponsor of the architecture
project.
The typical contents of the statement of for Architect of Architecture work are the title architecture,
project, request and background architecture, project description and scope, specific change of scope,
procedures, roles, responsibilities and deliverables, acceptance criteria and procedures, architecture,
project plan and schedule and approvals.
Please note an overview of the architecture.
Vision is also part of the Statement of Architecture work.
So you document the vision you have created during the architecture vision phase in the statement of
architecture work.
To sum it up, the statement of architecture work is the response to the request for architecture work,
a contract between the architecting organizations and the sponsor of the architecture project, and
the document against which the execution of the architecture projects measured.
Which brings us to the architecture Vision.
The architecture vision is an early summary version of the full architecture definition that supports
stakeholder communication.
It provides a high level summary of the changes to the enterprise that will follow from the successful
deployment of the target architecture.
The purpose of the vision is to agree at the outset what the desired outcome should be for the architecture,
so that architects can then focus on the details necessary to validate feasibility.
Therefore, it provides stakeholders with a formally agreed outcome and communication basis early in
the admm cycle.
The architecture vision serves as a basis to develop the domain architectures, business data, application
and technology.
Lastly, the deep dive into the communication plan.
The communication plan is a means for communicating architectural information to stakeholders.
Enterprise architectures contain large volumes of complex and interdependent information.
Effective communication of targeted information to the right stakeholders at the right time is a critical
success factor for enterprise architecture, and the development of a communication plan for architecture
allows for this communication to be carried out within a planned and managed process.
Therefore, it ensures effective communication of targeted information to the right stakeholders at
the right time.
The contents of a communication plan are the stakeholders grouped by the communication requirements,
the information to be communicated to each stakeholder, for instance, the communication needs of the
stakeholders and the key message in relation to the architecture.
Vision in relation to the communication risk and in relation to the critical success factors.
And if you know the key message, you must also determine how to transport the message.
Therefore, the communication plan also contains mechanisms that will be used to communicate with stakeholders
and allow access to architecture information such as meetings, newsletters or repositories.
And lastly, a communication timetable showing which communications will occur, with which stakeholder
groups, at what time and in what location.
Okay, students, that's it for phase A, the architecture vision phase.
Let's move on with phase B.


=== Wrap-up & Download Script ===


--- Phase B: Business Architecture ---

All right, guys, the second phase of the ADM cycle is the business architecture phase.
The business architecture phase is also the first phase of the three phases.
The phases for the development of the business architecture, the phase information systems, architectures
for the development of the data architecture and application architecture, and the phase for the development
of the technology architecture.
In phase B business architecture, you develop a business architecture to support an agreed architecture
vision.
The business architecture is the prerequisite for architecture work in any other domain, because you
want to align the data, application and technology architecture to the business architecture.
In their professional environment, this is also referred to as business IT alignment.
But before we get into the input steps, approach output and outcome of phase B business architecture,
let's briefly define what a business architecture is in the first place.
The business architecture is a representation of holistic, multi-dimensional business views of capabilities,
end to end value delivery, information and organizational structure, and it includes relationships
among business views and strategies, products, policies, initiatives and stakeholders, and relates
business elements to business goals and elements of other domains.
Lastly, it is determined in scope primarily by the architecture vision.
I know this is a bit academic, but in summary, the business architecture defines how to realize the
business strategy.
The business architecture provides insight into the organization structure, operational processes,
as well as its business strategy and value streams.
The business architecture describes the baseline and target state of the enterprise.
For example, the organization with the organization map the processes with our business process model,
the value streams of the enterprise, the capabilities with the capability map, and so on.
So what are the relevant information to develop the business architecture?
This slide lists the four non-architectural inputs.
The most important inputs are the business principles, goals and drivers.
So let's have a look at them.
Business principles, goals and drivers provide business context for the architecture work.
They describe the needs and ways of working within the enterprise, and may have significant implications
for the way that architecture is developed.
Although being outside the consideration of the architecture discipline, unfortunately the content
and structure of business context for architecture is likely to vary considerably from one organisation
to the next.
An explanation of the business principles, goals, and drivers has usually been defined elsewhere in
the enterprise prior to the architecture activity, and they are restated as an output of the preliminary
phase and reviewed against as a part of phase A architecture vision to ensure that the current definitions
are correct and clear.
In phase B, you now use these business principles, business goals, and business drivers to design
an architecture that supports them.
To give a complete view of the inputs.
We have also listed the architecture inputs on this slide.
We are not going any deeper here, but now let's make a deep dive into the steps and approach of phase
B business architecture.
You use a GAAP approach to develop the business architecture?
GAAP approach means that you develop the baseline architecture or in other terms, the as is architecture.
Then you develop the target architecture and finally do a gap analysis to identify the missing pieces
between baseline and target architecture.
The gap approach applies not only to face be the business architecture, but also to face see the information
systems architecture and the technology architecture.
Therefore, you always follow the same steps in all the three phases.
First, you select reference models, viewpoints and the tools to describe and model the business architecture.
Then you develop the baseline architecture.
The target architecture and perform a gap analysis between the baseline and target architecture.
After that, you define the candidate roadmap components.
You need to fill the gaps between baseline and target architecture.
And since you are changing the architecture from a baseline architecture to a target architecture,
it is important that you identify and resolve impacts across the architecture landscape that occurs
as a result from this change.
Once you've done that, you can return to the general less architecture specific tasks of project management.
You conduct a formal stakeholder review for the business and target architecture, as well as the gap
analysis, candidate roadmap components and impacts across the architecture landscape.
You finalize the business architecture and last but not least, document everything in the Architecture
Definition document.
In the following slides, I will give you more detailed information and tips on the highlighted steps.
The first step is to select reference models, viewpoints and tools.
It is important that you select reference models, viewpoints and tools at the beginning.
Otherwise, there is a risk that you will have to rework.
Ask yourself the following questions.
Given a set of stakeholders and concerns, what information do you need to know about the system being
examined to address their concerns?
This question will help you identify exactly the information you need and no more.
Or ask yourself, given a set of information, how will you model, represent, capture, and analyze
it?
This question helps you to find the right modeling, to be able to work with it, and to communicate
the architecture accordingly.
Another question is, are there reference models that allow you to skip to gathering and analyzing rather
than inventing?
This question will help you save time and think about using industry standards and another question
is what information is missing from the EA landscape right now?
With this question, take a look at the EA repository and try to reuse existing information instead
of developing all new.
To summarize this slide, plan the information, the process of gathering the information, and the
use of the information to work in a targeted manner elicited only what is necessary and use existing
information.
Here are a few tips for the three steps.
Develop the baseline architecture.
Develop the target architecture and perform gap analysis.
Describe the baseline architecture only to the extent to get an alignment among stakeholders and to
determine gaps.
Describe the baseline and target architecture with the same technique at the same level of detail to
identify everything that changes.
If you use another technique or other level of detail, it will be difficult to identify gaps.
And when developing the baseline and target architecture, focus on the landscape that will change and
have need for traceability.
Let's continue with the next step.
Within the step defined candidate roadmap components, you identify the work to reach the target.
However, please keep costs and value in mind.
The target state provides an increase in value at a cost of change, and the practitioner which is you,
is accountable for guiding value.
You need to create an understanding of the work to reach the target considering cost and value.
If you do not have an understanding of the work to reach the target, the value of the target, and
the cost of the target, how can you represent to a stakeholder that any target is a good idea and addresses
the organization's preferences?
All right, students, the next step resolve impacts across the architecture landscape.
I know that the steps are exhausting, but the TOGAF standard wants you to know these things.
But on the other hand, these are valuable hints for the practical work as an enterprise architect.
You need to explore the impact of the candidate architecture against other candidate architectures.
Transition states the target state's ongoing implementation projects and enterprises risk.
At this stage, other architecture artifacts in the architecture landscape should be examined.
Ask yourself, does this architecture create an impact on any pre-existing architectures?
Have recent changes been made that impact the architecture?
Are there any opportunities to leverage work from this architecture in other areas of the organization?
Does this architecture impact other projects, including those planned as well as those currently in
progress?
All impacts need to be resolved in terms of value expectation, which is based upon clear traceability
from the work required to realise the target architecture through the gap to the expected value.
To explore and resolve the impacts of the change is one of the most complex activities.
It requires a functioning a repository and solid analytic and reporting software.
But resolving impacts across the landscape is also one of the most important steps in managing the landscape.
Without care and attention to addressing the impacts across the architecture landscape in all of its
states, you cannot have confidence that your candidate architecture best serves the enterprise.
As a quick tip, manage the information volume down to the minimum and constantly chase the minimum
set of concerns that visibly support value in the eyes of the key stakeholders.
The last step of the beaded faces into which we do a deep dive.
Conduct a formal stakeholder review.
In my opinion, this is the most important step you need to obtain approval for the target architecture.
Without approval by the stakeholders.
No implementation governance is possible and no governance of more detailed architecture is possible.
Without approvals, you only have a documented opinion.
But stakeholders, subject matter experts, implementers and decision makers also have opinions that
may differ from yours.
You need to explore options, costs and benefits of alternatives with the help of the architecture trade
off method, and you need to assist yourself in reaching a compromise and selecting the best possible
path and against a set of competing preferences and interests.
All of this is only possible if you work closely with stakeholders.
And last but not least, with an approved target architecture.
The future is defined, traceability to the objective is available and trade off has been performed.
Everyone knows and has confirmed where the enterprise is headed.
That's it for this step of phase B business architecture.
Let's continue with the general approach for the architecture development phases B, C and D, meaning
you can use the approach for all of these phases.
After that, we will deep dive into the approach only applicable to phase B, and we will also have
a look into the guidelines and techniques that can be used during the business architecture phase.
Especially, the guidelines and techniques are close to practice and make the architecture development
more tangible than the theoretical steps and approaches.
The general architecture development approach for the phases B, C, and D.
First of all, you need to know that the steps for phase B, I just explained to you and all the steps
for the phases C and D are mandatory, but changed from purpose to purpose, domain to domain, project
to project and team to team in level of detail, precision and formality.
You should use these steps as a checklist for your architecture development.
The step order and realization time are also adapted to the architecture governance, and you can skip
some architecture development steps, but the outcome outcome could be at risk.
And maybe you find it surprising that the steps outlined in the Tokyo Standard to develop architecture
in phase B, C, and D are identical.
The steps are identical because the approach for developing an architecture, confirming the work,
product developed, fits and confirming approval are identical.
Also applicable to all beaded faces is to use and update the enterprise architecture repository with
the minimum information needed.
You start and finish the architecture development with the contents of the repository.
Whenever analysis or reporting is needed, the first stop is the repository.
Ask yourself is the information that addresses the question already available in the repository?
Is there a superior architecture that guides and constrains the task at hand?
What is the minimum information needed to cover shortfalls in the A repository?
To be a good enterprise architect means not to perform the analysis that could be done.
It means to perform the analysis that must be done to address the stakeholders concerns.
So much for the general approach to all the B that faces.
Let's continue with the approach that is suitable for the face B Business architecture.
Business architecture is the first architecture activity that needs to be done.
It is a prerequisite for architecture work of data application technology architecture because the data
application and technology architecture need to enable and support the business architecture, and the
business architecture is a means of demonstrating the business value and return on invest of subsequent
architecture work to key stakeholders.
You can distinguish two cases.
Case one parts of the business architecture are already done.
Then you need to verify and update the documented material and bridge between high level and specific
requirements.
Or case two little or no business architecture is done.
Then you need to research, verify and gain buy in to key business objectives and processes as a basis
for developing the business architecture.
You should also use and update the existing high level architecture descriptions that came from the
previous phase A of the architecture vision.
Whatever the scope of the specific project, it is important to determine if fundamental view of the
business is changing and if not, to use the existing views to determine scope, priorities and relationships
for the specific project in relation to the rest of the enterprise.
And if no architecture description exists, then you gather the relevant information to develop the
business architecture models.
To develop the business architecture, you should use proven models like a business capability map,
a value stream model, an organization map or business process models, and apply industry specific
modeling techniques, for example UML.
And to save time, to be consistent and to leverage best practices, you should use resources from the
architecture repository, for instance, industry reference models, applicable standards, enterprise
specific business architecture views and building blocks.
Let's dig deeper in the approach and especially into the techniques for developing our business architecture.
But first, let me sharpen your understanding about enterprise architecture.
As part of the practice of business architecture, we separate the concerns of what we do describe through
business capabilities from who does it describe through an organization map, from how value is achieved
described through value streams, from how it is implemented or performed at an operational level,
described through processes from the information that is needed, described through information maps
and the data architecture from the systems that are used, described through the application architecture
and so on.
All of this is not just flying around in space, but is interconnected to form a whole enterprise architecture.
So let's get into the business architecture.
Techniques like business capabilities, information mapping, value streams, organization maps and
business models.
Let's first talk about business capabilities.
Business architecture needs a concept to express its abilities and capacities, and you can use business
capabilities for that.
A business capability is a particular ability or capacity that a business may possess or exchange to
achieve a specific purpose or outcome.
A combination of roles, processes, information, and tools enables a business capability.
The figure shows a level one business capability map.
It represents a complete and stable set of all the abilities that an enterprise has at its disposal
to run its business.
For example, you can see the business capability, business planning, market planning, partner management
and so on which have been grouped into strategic capabilities.
Below that you can see core capabilities and supporting capabilities.
Please note this is a level one business capability map, and you can create for each business capability
on level one, another capability map on level two, and for each capability on level two, a capability
map on level three, and so on.
This allows you to further to, uh, further detail the business capabilities.
And as an analysis technique, you can use heat mapping to show different perspectives on the same set
of capabilities.
For instance, maturity, effectiveness, performance value or costs.
For example, colors may indicate status, such as purple, denoting a capability that does not exist
yet in the company, but is desired, or perhaps as a capability that is overfunded and has more resources
than necessary.
As already mentioned in the previous slide, a business capability can be decomposed from top level
into lower levels.
To express more detail on the left figure, you can see the decomposition of the capability human resource
management to make the connection back to face B business architecture.
The Business Capability Map provides a self-contained view of the business that is independent of the
current organizational structure, business processes, information systems and applications, and the
rest of the product or service portfolio.
So those business capabilities should be mapped back to the organizational units, value streams, information
systems, and strategic plans within the scope of the Enterprise Architecture project.
This relationship mapping provides greater insights into the alignment and optimization of each of those
domains, especially in mapping business capabilities to stages in a value stream is valuable.
It highlights which capabilities are critical to business operation, and since business processes enable
business capabilities as ability, the organization must have to deliver the value characterized in
the value streams.
We have a link between business capabilities, value streams, and business processes.
Your business architecture becomes interconnected.
Last but not least, for business capabilities.
Please note that business capabilities executed in many parts of the organization can lead to inefficiency.
The next technique we are talking about is information mapping.
An information map is a collection of information concepts and the relationships they reflect the business
vocabulary.
For instance, what is the client?
How is he connected to an account and to products?
A useful way to discern an information concept is to listen for the nouns that I use when talking about
the business.
Every noun is potentially an information concept.
By using a noun challenge process, it is possible to determine if the noun represents an item of information
that the business cares about.
In other words, does anyone in the business need to know, store, or manipulate the thing that the
noun represents?
The figure shows an example of an information map.
The blue rectangles are the information concepts or nouns, and the arrows represents their relationships.
For example, a payment is made against a loan that requests or receives a customer, and so on.
You can also group and categorize related information into information domains.
Please note mapping information in business architecture starts with listing and describing those elements
that matter most to the business, and stakeholder maps help to define information concepts.
Information mapping explains what information is needed within an enterprise.
Therefore, information concepts are linked to business capabilities without assuming specific implementations.
And a few minutes earlier I explained that value streams are also linked to business capabilities and
that business capabilities are linked to the business processes.
Therefore, information concepts are linked to value streams through business capabilities and furthermore
to business processes.
Another step into the direction of an interconnected business architecture.
So much for information mapping.
The next technique we're going to talk about is value streams.
Value streams are an approach for value analysis.
A value stream is an internally or externally triggered end to end collection of value adding activities,
creating an overall result for the stakeholders, for instance, customer or end users and the value
adding activities are represented by value stream stages, each of which creates and adds incremental
stakeholder value from one stage to the next.
The illustration shows the value stream for a retail product with a value stream.
Stages advertised channels, display merchandise, enable selection, process payment and deliver merchandise.
You can see the end to end approach, starting with the advertisement and ending with the delivery.
You could even add satisfactory service and other value stream stages to the value stream and value
streams are useful because they complete set of value streams, denotes an organization's primary set
of business activities, and aggregates how the organization creates value for its stakeholders.
And that's exactly what we want to support with a good data application and technology architecture.
Please note value is always defined from the perspective of the stakeholder.
Only the value that the stakeholder perceives is real value.
Value streams explain how value is achieved through an enterprise, and the complete set of value streams
depicts how an organization orchestrates its capabilities to create stakeholder value.
Value streams are linked to business capabilities and business processes.
The figure shows the relationships between value value streams.
Value stream stages, and other business architecture concepts.
R process.
Operationalizes a value stage and a capability enables value stage.
As mentioned earlier, the value stream consists of multiple value stages and creates value that is
received and perceived by a stakeholder.
Another way to think about the relationship between value streams and business processes is to consider
the view point.
Value streams take an outside in perspective, usually a customer end user, and show how value gets
created and moved around in relation to that stakeholder only.
Business processes, on the other hand, tend to have more of an inward looking operational level focus
that is primarily concerned with how work gets done.
It's the operational implementation.
While some business processes may cover the same stream of activity that forms a value stream, it usually
occurs at a much more granular level.
The granularity is ideal for optimizing workflow and efficiency, for instance, incrementally improving
existing activities, but is far less suited to answering deeper questions about how a business should
serve its customers in such a way that maximizes the value generated along the way.
Let's go back to the phase B business architecture approach with value streams.
Value streams are an approach for value analysis.
You should start with the initial value stream models of phase A and add needed streams.
You can use heat mapping or use cases for analyzing the value streams, and you should map out relationships
between the stages in a value stream to business capabilities, and perform a gap analysis for capabilities.
That's it about value streams.
Onto the next technique the organization map.
The organization map explains who provides the business capability of an enterprise.
The figure shows an example where the blue oval represents the enterprise and denotes the scope represented
by the map.
The surrounding green and purple ovals denote the internal organizations, for instance business units
and departments, and the orange ovals external organizations.
As you can see, the internal and external organizations are connected with Arcs that represent the
flow of values and information between the organizations, and the rectangles denote a business capability.
The business architecture needs an organizational context for the enterprise architecture effort, and
is one of the core elements of business architecture.
The organization map provides the organizational context for enterprise architecture.
It identifies the business units or third parties that possess or use those capabilities, and which
participate in the value streams or in other words, an organization Map is a business architecture
blueprint showing main organizational units, partners and stakeholder groups and the working relationships
and taken together with the methods outlined in phase B of the Toga framework as well as the associated
business architecture.
The organization map provides an understanding of which organizational units to involve in the architecture
effort, who with and when to talk about the given requirement and how to measure the impact of various
decisions.
So it is a quite valuable for your enterprise architecture.
Please note organization maps are not organization charts.
Organization charts describe the business in terms of a top down hierarchy that is focused on people
and titles.
An organization map describes a network of relationships and interactions between business entities
that may extend beyond the legal boundaries of the enterprise.
Therefore, an organization map helps to describe how organizations actually operate across formal boundaries
and and silos.
And while organization charts are internally focused and used to communicate basic structures and reporting
relationships of the business to its stakeholders, the organization maps are whole system oriented
in order to accurately represent all the relationships, internal and external, between each of the
key participants in the business model of the enterprise.
But, uh.
But how and when to develop an organization map.
In phase A architecture vision, you search for and use existing organization descriptions and conventional
organizational charts and organization maps.
In phase B business architecture, you build out the organization map with a detail and relationships
to ensure the business needs are understood.
Let's continue with the next technique for phase B, the business modeling technique.
Business models provide a high level visual representation of the current state and or future state
design of a business.
They describe the rationale for how an organization creates, captures, and delivers value to its internal
and external stakeholders.
The figure shows the business model canvas.
On the right side of the canvas, you represent the customer segments of the enterprise, the value
proposition, as well as how you build and maintain the customer relationships and the channels you
use to reach your customers.
On the left side, you define your key activities.
You need to create and deliver the value, as well as key partners and key resources you need for your
business.
On the bottom, you find more financial data, for instance the cost structure and revenue streams.
Please note the business Model canvas is just one of many business models.
As you can imagine, our business model provides a powerful construct to help focus and align an organization
around its strategic vision and execution.
They provide a common understanding of what the organization is or looks like today, or what it intends
to become in the future, and the most important for you as an architect, they create a critical link
between the business strategy and the required blueprints of the enterprise architecture that define
what the business needs to transform to, along with the plans that describes how to do it.
And to develop a business model helps to communicate key ideas about the vision and strategy, generates
cross-disciplinary discussions, and promotes buy in.
But how is a business model connected to the business architecture?
The business architecture articulates the perspective and impacts on the business model.
Let's discuss the relationship between business models and business architecture on the next slide.
The business strategy, the business model and the business architecture relate to another one well
known model for shaping the strategic positioning are the five competitive forces of Michael Porter,
also known as Five Forces.
Porter's Five Forces is a model that identifies and analyzes five competitive forces that shape every
industry and helps determine an industry's weakness and strength.
You use it to identify an industry structure to determine corporate strategy.
The five forces are completion in the industry, potential of new entrants into the industry, power
of suppliers and power of customers, and threat of substitute products.
And the strategic position is represented by a business model and in the standard phase B business architecture,
you as an enterprise architecture, take the high level business model artifact and develop a detailed
set of architecture blueprints representing different viewpoints of the proposal to enable more in-depth
planning, investment and option analysis.
Please note you do not need to know the details of the five Forces model or the Business Model canvas,
but you need to know that business models are an important source for developing the business architecture,
and that your business architecture is derived from the business model.
And last but not least, for the approach, Guidelines and techniques of phase B Business Architecture.
Let's look at modeling techniques.
In addition to the presented techniques, value streams, business models, organization maps, business
capabilities and information mapping, the TOGAF standard suggests to apply industry specific modeling
techniques.
For instance, for instance, the most common modeling language, UML, the Unified Modeling Language.
UML provides several diagram types.
You can use so-called use case models with diagrams and specifications to describe business processes,
actors, and participants.
You can use logical data models for describing the entities, their attributes and acceptable values,
as well as relationships, or you can use class models.
A class model expands the logical data model to include behaviors.
The figure shows an UML business class diagram.
It expresses that a customer has a contact address, a bill address, and a ship to address, and that
all these specific addresses are generalized addresses.
Okay, we are almost there.
Let's go to the last part of this.
Be the outcomes and output.
The major outcome of phase B is the business architecture approved by the stakeholders, as well as
the gaps and the work needed to clear the gaps and an understanding of the stakeholders about the gaps
and work ahead.
And what knowledge have you gained as an architect for your architectural development?
You know how the current enterprise fails to meet the preferences of the stakeholders.
You know what must change to enable the enterprise to meet the preferences of the stakeholders, the
so-called gaps.
You know what work is necessary to realize the changes that is consistent with the addition value being
created.
This so called work packages.
And you know, the stakeholders priority and preferences are adjusted in response to value, effort
and risk of change.
The so called stakeholder requirements.
As a small tip for your exam preparation.
The outcome and the knowledge gained is the same in all be that faces for instance face be business
architecture, face information systems architecture and face the technology architecture.
Of course the results differ in their domain.
In the business architecture domain, you have an outcome and a proof business architecture and then
the technology architecture domain accordingly an approved technology architecture.
But in both cases there is an approved architecture.
And in both cases, you know how the current enterprise fails to meet the preferences of the stakeholders,
what needs to change?
What are the necessary work packages, and what are the stakeholder requirements in terms of business
architecture, for example, you identify missing business capabilities and processes for the sales
process.
While in terms of application architecture, for example, you have identified a missing customer relationship
management system to support this capability.
And which outputs are generated in phase B.
Here you can find an overview.
All right, students, that was a long chapter.
I hope that Faicp business architecture is understood and that the example techniques have helped.
The next phases are not that long because, as mentioned earlier, you can use the general steps and
approaches of phase B business architecture to develop the information systems and technology architecture.
I won't read out the outputs, but we'll let the video run a bit so you can read through them yourself.
See you in next lesson.
Phase C Information Systems architecture.


=== Bonus ===


--- Phase C: Information Systems Architectures ---

In this lesson we are going to talk about phase C Information Systems architecture.
As you might know, this phase is the only phase in the ADM that is divided into two parts into the
development of the data architecture and the development of the application architecture.
You can work on the two parts in any order or in parallel.
As you can see, phase C addresses the D, the data architecture and the A application architecture
from the B that faces the information systems architectures, respectively.
The target data and application architecture enables the business architecture and vision.
Therefore, in phase C Information Systems architecture, you develop the target data and application
architecture to support the agreed architecture vision.
Of course you will need information again for this.
Non-architectural inputs for phase C Information Systems architecture are the requests for architecture
work, the capability assessment and the communications plan.
This applies to the data and application architecture, but also to face business architecture and face
the technology architecture.
The non architectural inputs are more or less the same in all phases.
Let's have a look at the most important architectural inputs.
This is a list of architectural inputs that the Torgoff standard recommends for developing the target
data and application architecture.
Most of the inputs of this are repeated at almost every stage, like the organization and model for
Enterprise Architecture or the Tailored Architecture Framework.
Let's take a look at the more specific inputs for data and application architecture.
The data and application principles.
Data and application principles are architecture principles developed in the preliminary phase.
They are general rules and guidelines defining and guiding the organization.
Let's look at an example for a data principle.
You can find a lot of architectural principles in the autograph standard in the document ADM techniques.
An architecture principle consists of a statement, a rationale and implications.
This is an excerpt of the data principle data shared.
For example, the statement is that users have access to the data necessary to perform the duties.
Therefore, data is shared across enterprise functions and organizations.
The rationale says it is less costly to maintain timely, accurate data in a single application and
then share it than it than it is to maintain duplicative data in multiple applications.
And you have implications like for the long terme as a legacy systems are replaced, we must adopt and
enforce common data access policies and guidelines for new application developers to ensure the data
in new applications remain available to the shared environment and the data in a shared environment
can continue to be used by the new applications.
This data principle help you to define the target architecture and also transition architectures.
The principle basically says that legacy systems will be replaced long terme.
Let's move on to the steps for phase C.
As already mentioned, the steps and phase C information systems architecture are the same for phase
B, C, and D.
If you need a refresher on the steps, simply go back to phase B and listen to the steps again.
Let's talk about the data architecture approach.
You should build and use a data architecture aka a data structure.
The TOGAF standard recommends many techniques to describe a data architecture.
Data entity data, component catalog, data entity, business function, matrix, application data matrix,
and so on.
The figure on the right shows a few examples.
For example, the data entity business function matrix.
The burp purpose of the data entity business function matrix is to depict the relationship between data
entities and business functions within the enterprise.
With this matrix, you can assign ownership of data entities to organizations or define application
of a region, application of record, and application of reference for data entities.
Another example is the logical data diagram.
The key purpose of the logical data diagram is to show logical views of the relationships between critical
data entities within the enterprise, and is developed to address the concerns of application developers
and database designers.
Speaking of data models, the data architecture is created by using three metamodel entities the data
entity, logical data components, and physical data component.
You use these entities in different types of data models.
Let's go through them.
You use the data entities in conceptual data models.
A data entity is an encapsulation of data that is recognized by a business domain expert as a thing.
Logical data entities can be tied to applications, repositories, and services and may be structured
according to the implementation considerations.
For example, a customer may include a list of contracts.
Each contract may contain an address.
All three objects customer, contract, and address are data entities.
Please note data entities and attributes are different.
Data entities are things.
Attributes aren't things, but rather describe things.
For example, the attribute, street, apartment number, and city are attributes describing the data
entity address.
And you use conceptual data models with data entities to help IT developers to understand the concepts
they will be dealing with.
Let's illuminate the next meta model entity the logical data component.
You use logical data components in logical data models.
A logical data component is a boundary zone that encapsulates related data entities to form a logical
location to be held, for example, external procurement information.
The logical data component.
External procurement information encapsulates all related data entities, for instance the data entity,
vendor master records, delivery schedules, or supplier contracts.
And you use logical data models with logical data components to create an overview of the data of the
environments and as a requirement on the data stored in applications, aka the data at rest.
The data move between applications, aka the data in motion or data at the user interface of applications,
aka the data in use.
And the last meta model entity, the physical data component.
A physical data component is a boundary zone that encapsulates related data entities to form a physical
location to be held.
For example, a purchase order business object which contains purchase order header and item.
Business object nodes use physical data models with physical data components to cluster existing or
future IT implementations, for instance database schemas and XML messages.
You can use the three meta model entities data entities, logical and physical data components to develop
even more data models.
For example, a data exchange model to describe data paths between, into and out of IT services and
logical and physical application components, or you use the terms in the techniques described in the
previous slides.
And if needed, you can enrich the data entities with quality attributes.
Your data architecture should handle data at rest, in motion, in use and open data.
Data at rest.
That means the stored data.
Data in motion meaning the data and transactions services or respectively.
APIs.
Data in use or in other words, the data at the border of the application.
For example, the data that is displayed to the user in the graphical user interface, and open data,
meaning data that the organization provides for public usage.
The effective use of data can be a competitive advantage.
Therefore, it is important that you develop a solid data architecture.
There are three important considerations when developing a data architecture.
First, the data management define which application components serve as an enterprise master data.
Understand how data entities are utilized by business capabilities, business functions, processes,
and business and application services, and understand how and where enterprise data entities are created,
stored, transported, and reported.
The second thing you need to consider when developing a data architecture is the data migration.
Identify data migration requirements, provide indicators for data transformation, weeding, and cleansing,
and ensure an enterprise wide common data definition to support the transformation and migration.
And the third key consideration is data governance.
Ensure that the enterprise has the necessary structures, management systems and people in place to
enable the transformation and of course, perform the data governance.
And finally, on the procedure of developing a data architecture.
As always, use the architecture repository.
Consider what relevant data architecture resources are available from the architecture repository,
in particular generic data models relevant to the organization's industry.
Are there any external reference data models available you can use, or are there any standards available?
How to encrypt your data?
Take a look in the reference library and also consider external resources.
This makes your life much easier.
So much for data architecture.
Let's have a quick view into the application architecture.
The Togo standard is very vague about the approach for the development of the target application architecture.
You already know this slide from the foundation course.
We will repeat this at this point.
And then I would like to introduce you to the topic application architecture using the artifacts, even
though this is not part of the curriculum.
The standard suggests as an approach to develop an application architecture to use application models
that are relevant to common high level business functions like e-commerce or supply chain management.
Furthermore, the TOGAF standard suggests to use generic business models and related application models
that are relevant to the organization's industry sector.
You can save a lot of time by using them.
There are providers for industry specific application models, for example the open Group itself in
the open Group forum, or the Object Management Group or the TM forum.
Last but not least, you can use the triple Erm from the open Group.
That is a reference model for integrated information infrastructure and focuses on the application level,
components and services necessary to provide an integrated information structure.
Well, that's all the talk of standard offers.
Let's look at the artifacts to bring some light into the dark.
The Togo Standard lists many catalogues, matrices, and diagrams that may be created within the development
of the application architecture.
We will look at the artifacts application Portfolio catalogue, the application organization matrix,
and the application communication diagram so that you understand how an application architecture can
look like and be developed.
The first artifact we take a closer look at is the Application Portfolio Catalog.
It provides a foundation for other matrices and diagrams by listing logical application components and
physical application components.
A logical application component is an encapsulation of application functionality that is independent
of a particular implementation.
For example, the classification of all purchase request processing applications implemented in an enterprise.
Physical application component is an application application module, application service, or other
deployable component or functionality.
For example, a configured and deployed instance of a commercial off the shelf product for enterprise
resource planning.
As you may have noticed, we enterprise architects always try to think in terms of logical and physical
components, where a logical component describes an implementation independent functionality that is
then implemented by a concrete software solution, or in other words, a physical application component.
The figure shows you an example of a logical application portfolio catalog.
You can enhance the catalog, for instance, to define an application owner.
And we started with this artifact because a list of applications is usually the starting point of the
application architecture.
Another part of the puzzle to describe the application architecture and a very common artifact is the
application communication diagram.
It shows the application components and their interfaces.
For instance, app one and app three do have interfaces with app two.
Please note the interfaces may be associated with data entities.
This would allow you to document what data is exchanged with which interface.
You could also associate application with business services to document which business service is supported
by which application.
Lastly, a practical advice the model communications should be logical and should only show technology
where it is relevant.
Otherwise, your models are too detailed.
You increase the effort in creating them and your stakeholders do not perceive any added value in them.
Generally speaking, as little as possible.
As detailed as necessary.
And another very common artifact is the application organization matrix.
It shows the usage of applications within the organization.
It shows which organizational units are supported by which applications and therefore help to understand
the application support requirements.
For example, if an organization unit performs a very important business operation and is supported
by the application, there may be higher requirements in terms of fail safety for this application.
Furthermore, you can use this matrix for your gap analysis and determine whether any of the applications
are missing and as a result, need to be created.
And therefore, for example, you can easily assign a missing application to an organization unit and
voila, you have defined a part of the target application architecture.
Short excursion into my professional experience as an enterprise architect.
I don't usually create matrices to communicate.
My architecture models are much better for stakeholder communication.
Even though matrices help with data collection most of the time.
I also use professional enterprise architecture management software to support application landscapes.
These generate the appropriate views based on the data.
All right.
That's it for the steps approach and the artifacts of fake application architecture.
Let's have a look at the outcome and outputs of phase C.
As mentioned earlier, the TOGAF standard does not distinguish between phases B, C, and D in terms
of outcome and knowledge gained.
Therefore, I will not repeat these points.
If you want to refresh your knowledge again or need an explanation, you can repeat the video about
phase B.
Lastly, an overview of the key outputs for phase C.
Please read through these at your own leisure.
In general, if you hear something with data, application or information, it is very likely that you
can locate this in phase C Information Systems architecture.
So much for Fauci.
Let's continue with face D technology architecture.

--- Phase D: Technology Architecture ---

Let's talk about the last bearded face.
Face.
The technology architecture.
The technology architecture supports the business data and application architecture.
In this phase, you are defining the technology building blocks you need to support the data and application
architecture.
As mentioned in phase C Application architecture, the non architectural inputs for the three beaded
phases are more or less the same.
The request for architecture work, the capability assessment and the communication plan.
Most of the architectural inputs are also the same as in phase B and C, such as the architectural vision,
the Architecture repository, the Architecture Definition Document and the Architecture Requirements
Specification.
But since you have usually already developed the business data and application architecture, you also
have the architecture components of these architectures available as input.
In other words, everything you have already created in this Admm cycle or in another architecture project
and stored in the architecture repository is available to you.
I know the talk of standard is not very satisfactory here, because a lot is repeated in the build phases,
but my goal is to teach you the standard as given in the textbook.
As already mentioned, the steps in phase two information Systems architecture are the same for phase
B, C, and D.
If you need a refresher on the steps, simply go back to phase B and listen to the steps again.
Let's continue with the approach.
The technology architecture can be more than just a fulfillment tool for the data and application architecture,
and thus for the business architecture.
Emerging technologies are a major driver for change in enterprises.
You might think that the business is the only driver for change because the enterprise architecture
is led by business concerns.
This is very often the case, and also the right thing to do in order to align business and it.
But the evolution of new technologies is a major driver for change in enterprises looking for new,
innovative ways of operating and improving the business.
Therefore, the suggested approach to develop a solid technology architecture is to anticipate and be
open to technology driven change and to look for new, innovative ways of operating and improve the
business.
The technology architecture needs to capture the transformation opportunities available through adoption
of new technology and the TOGAF.
ADM enables technology change to become a driver and strategic resource rather than a recipient of change
requests.
Therefore, the technology architecture is not just a respond to information system requirements.
The technology architecture may both drive business capabilities and respond to information system requirements
at the same time.
But be aware the rapid adoption of changing technologies can cause discontinuities across the enterprise,
and you need to identify and assess the impact on your architecture when introducing new technologies.
The TOGAF standard recommends, as with all phases, to reuse the existing resources from the architecture
repository for the development of the architecture.
There may be documented IT services or IT service catalogs in the architecture repository that could
be useful in developing the technology architecture.
And there are generic technology models that are relevant to the company's industry that you can use.
In addition, you can use the triple Erm and the technical reference model TRM from the open Group.
That's it for phase D technology architecture, at least what the curriculum dictates.
However, I find this is not enough to understand the topic technology architecture.
Therefore we will look at a few artifacts of the technology architecture.
A typically starting point for developing the baseline and target technology architecture is the development
or enhancement of an technology portfolio catalog.
The Technology Portfolio Catalog is a list of all the technology in use across the enterprise, including
hardware, infrastructure, software, and application software.
The figure shows an example of a logical technology portfolio catalog.
One line of the catalog represents one logical technology used within the enterprise.
Each line documents the name of the logical technology component, a short description, an acquisition
date, and a category.
For example, the logical technology component workflow automation automates repetitive tasks and processes,
improving efficiency and reducing human intervention.
Depending on the needs, other attributes may be useful to describe a technology component.
An agreed technology portfolio supports the life cycle management of technology products and versions,
and also forms the basis for the definition of technology standards.
The Technology Portfolio Catalog also provides a foundation on which to base the remaining matrices
and diagrams.
The next artifact is the platform decomposition diagram.
It depicts the technology platform that supports the operations of the information systems architecture.
The figure shows an example of a platform decomposition diagram for the logical applications, business
process automation and business intelligence.
For example, the platform business process automation consists of the technology components, application
connectors, event triggers, subscription services, and workflow.
The diagram should clearly show the enterprise applications and the decompose technology components.
It covers all aspects of the infrastructure platform and provides an overview of the enterprise technology
platform.
The diagram can be expanded to map the technology platform to appropriate application components within
a specific functional process area, and the platform decomposition diagram may show specification details
such as product versions, number of CPUs, etc., or simply could be an informal chart providing an
overview of the technical environment.
From my point of view, it is debatable whether business process automation is a logical application
consisting of the technology components, application connectors, event triggers, subscription services,
and workflow automation, or whether business process automation is not itself a logical technology
component.
Lastly, I would like to share with you an example of an environment and location diagram.
The environments and location diagram depicts what technologies are used at which location.
In this example, you can see which operating systems are used in which environments.
Depending on the question, the diagram content can be completely different.
For example, you can also map the network and the network components used for each location.
So much for our excursion into the artifacts of technology architecture.
I hope this has helped you to understand what is being developed in phase D technology architecture.
For the sake of completeness, I show the outcome acquired knowledge and outputs of face D technology
architecture.
Again, as mentioned earlier, the TOGAF standard does not distinguish between phase B, C, and D in
terms of outcome and knowledge gained.
If you want to refresh your your knowledge, please repeat the video about phase B.

--- Phase E: Opportunities & Solutions ---

By completing phase B through D, you have developed a target architecture.
Now it's time to identify what you need to deliver the target architecture.
And that is what phase E opportunities and solutions is for.
Face.
E is the process of identifying delivery vehicles that effectively deliver the target architecture identified
the previous phases.
Delivery vehicles are projects, programs or portfolios.
The objectives of face Opportunities and solutions is to generate the initial complete version of the
architecture roadmap based upon the Gap Analysis and Candidate Architecture roadmap components from
phases B, C, and D, and determine whether an incremental approach is required and, if so, to identify
the transition architectures that will deliver continuous business value.
And another objective for face opportunity solutions is to define the overall solution.
Building blocks the SBS to finalize the target architecture based on the architecture.
Building blocks the ABS.
While I have repeated the purpose and goals of face for you on the audio track, you may have noticed
that planning is a key aspect of face.
And in addition to the non-architectural inputs you are familiar with from the previous phases, it
is also advisable to reuse the planning methods available in the company.
On the architectural input side, it is the last three bullet points that essentially represent the
changes to the input compared to the previous phases.
On the one hand, you have the candidate architecture roadmap components from phases B, C, and D at
your disposal, which you plan out in this phase.
On the other hand, you should also take change requests for existing business programs or projects
into account.
And finally, in phase E Opportunity Solutions, it is important that you integrate your projects into
the company's governance models and frameworks at an early stage.
This is important so that you can later implement the architecture and not stumble over organizational
or procedural hurdles.
All right, now let's turn our attention to the steps of faith.
Or in other words, how to identify what you need to deliver the target architecture.
Well, you consolidate the gap analysis from all preceding phases and create an initial implementation
plan.
The Toga standard suggests the following steps.
First, you determine the key corporate change attributes and determine the business constraints for
implementation.
Then you review and consolidate the gap analysis results from phases B to D and review the consolidated
requirements across related business functions.
And you also need to consolidate and reconcile interoperability requirements, refine and validate dependencies,
and confirm the readiness and risk for the business transformation ahead.
As you can see, phase E opportunities and solutions up to this point consists of many activities where
you review and consolidate all the work you have done in the previous phases.
But now we come to the core of this phase.
You formulate the implementation and migration strategy.
You identify and group major work packages.
You identify transition architectures.
And finally you've reached your goal.
You create the architecture roadmap and the implementation and migration plan.
When thinking about phase, always keep in mind that phase E is the bridge between the target architecture
and the solution.
It concentrates on how to deliver the architecture.
Let us now delve a little deeper into each step.
Let's start with the first step.
Determine and confirm key corporate change attributes.
Please note I just said the first step, but that's not quite right.
The order of these steps, as well as the time at which they are formally started and completed, should
be adapted to the situation at hand in accordance with the established architecture governance.
But all activities that have been initiated in these steps must be closed during the create the Architecture
Roadmap and Implementation and Migration Plan step.
For the sake of simplicity, however, I will discuss the steps in a numbered order.
Let's start.
The step.
Determine and confirm key corporate change attributes.
Determines how the enterprise architecture can be best implemented to take advantage of the organization's
business culture.
To do this, you should assess the transition capabilities of the involved organization units and the
enterprises, including culture, abilities, and skills.
The resulting factors from the assessment should be documented in an implementation factor catalog.
The figure shows an example of an implementation factor catalog.
It is a list of the factors impacting the architecture, implementation and migration plan with a description
of the factor and the deductions that indicate the actions or constraints that have to be taken into
consideration when creating the implementation and migration plan.
Factors typically include risks, issues, assumptions, dependencies, actions, and impacts.
This catalog can serve as a repository for architecture implementation and migration decisions, or
in other words, as an archive and record of decisions.
The next step is to determine business constraints for implementation.
It is important to identify the business drivers that would constrain the implementation or the sequence
of implementation.
This should include a review of the business and strategic plans at both a corporate and line of business
level, and the review of the Enterprise Architecture Maturity Assessment.
These constraints are very important for developing the architecture roadmap and the implementation
and migration plan later on.
The table below shows the characteristics of the enterprise architecture maturity levels.
They indicate the ability of an organization to execute and practice enterprise architecture management.
An assessment of the of the organization's enterprise architecture determines the level at which the
organization currently stands.
For instance, level four, meaning that the organization has a managed and measured enterprise architecture
process.
If you are interested in architecture maturity models, you can find a whole TOGAF series guide about
architecture, maturity models and the TOGAF library.
The next step.
And in my opinion, one of the most important steps is to review and consolidate the gap analysis results
from phases B to D.
This should be done by creating a consolidated gaps, solutions and dependencies matrix.
The figure shows an example.
The consolidated gap solutions and dependencies matrix is a matrix in which you list the gaps with possible
solutions and dependencies for the implementation and migration.
This technique allows you to group the gaps identified in the domain architecture gap analysis results,
and assess potential solutions and dependencies to one or more gaps.
To create this matrix, you review the Facebook and Gap analysis results and consolidate them in a single
list.
Then you enhance the list with potential solutions to the gaps and dependencies.
To determine the dependencies, you can use a set of views such as the business interaction matrix,
the data entity business function matrix, and the application function matrix.
Once all of the gaps have been documented, reorganize the gap list and place similar items together
and if necessary, you should investigate different target architecture alternatives and discuss these
with stakeholders using the architecture, alternatives and trade offs technique.
You will find a separate video on architecture alternatives and trade off techniques in this course.
Okay dear students, but before we continue with the next step, I would like to insert another learning
objective at this point, namely the learning objective.
Explain how to balance opportunity and viability.
I think that now is the right time for this learning goal because in the previous step, review and
consolidate gap analysis results from phases B to D, we identified potential solutions for the identified
gaps.
And this slide provides further recommendation.
If you are looking for solutions, it is time to seek help outside the enterprise.
There may be better solutions available on the market than in your company, either within the same
vertical industry or elsewhere.
Technological developments and environmental changes may offer new solutions that you are not yet aware
of.
And as you probably know from your own professional experience, you always need information to scout
the market and talk with solution providers.
You will save a lot of time if you develop the specifications for the Business information system and
technology architecture right from the start, so that you can use these informations to search the
market for options.
And when you are assessing the solution options, you should assess them more from an exclusion point
of view rather than narrowing down to the solution.
In elaborating the architecture, new risks and dependencies will arise and so should appropriate controls
develop a matrix of options, risks and controls to enable viability analysis and trade off for stakeholders,
you will rarely find the perfect solution.
You need to explain the advantages and disadvantages of each solution option to the stakeholders, and
then decide together on the most suitable solution.
An accelerated path to the solution may also be to identify the list of standards and reference architectures
that can be leveraged or imposed as limiting conditions on the solution, so use the viewpoints fuse,
appropriate building blocks and reference architectures from the EA repository to develop a solution
for the identified gap.
And sometimes you're also faced with a technical gap for which no solution is available.
It is important that you identify gaps where a solution may have to be invented.
In such a case, create new work packages to perform proof of concept validations before scaling out.
Please note that proof of concept work is actually implementation and not architecture.
Architecture work is identifying the placeholder required to allocate appropriate funds and mitigate
unknowns.
The main focus of the architecture to support portfolio is to maximize the mileage gained with available
resources.
The second objective is to identify conditions under with projected mileage gain is achievable.
The third is to identify barriers to achieve the goal and build efforts to diminish the impact of such
barriers.
The final objective is to provide assurance of investment to reward ratio being unaltered.
And last but not least, to balance opportunity and viability, you should perform an opportunity analysis,
including viable options to approach the solution.
Let's go back to the steps of AC.
The next step is review consolidated requirements across related business functions.
But what is it for?
You should assess the requirements, gaps, solutions and factors to identify a minimal set of requirements
to enhance efficiency and effective implementation of the target architecture.
Or in other words, you should identify requirements that have something in common or can be fulfilled
with the same solution to exploit synergies, even if the requirements are from different stakeholders
or business functions.
This functional perspective leads to the satisfaction of multiple requirements through the provision
of shared solutions and services.
For example, several requirements raised by several lines of business can be resolved through the provision
of a shared set of business services and application services within a work package or project.
The step, consolidate and reconcile interoperability requirements is all about minimizing interoperability
conflicts.
First, you need to consolidate the interoperability requirements identified in previous phases, and
you need to review the architecture vision, the target architecture, the implementation factor catalog,
and the consolidated Gap Solutions and Dependencies matrix to identify constraints on interoperability
required by a potential set of solutions.
Even if you minimize interoperability conflicts, most of the time, you cannot solve them all.
Interoperability problems often arise from reuse solution building blocks commercial off the shelf products
and third party services providers.
Any such conflicts must be addressed in the architecture, and conflicts must be considered across all
architecture domains.
So in the Business data application and technology architecture and there are two basic approaches to
resolve interoperability conflicts.
Either create a building block that transforms or translates between conflicting building blocks, or
make a change to the specification of the conflicting building blocks.
Moving on with the next step.
Refine and validate dependencies.
You need to refine the initial dependencies, ensuring that any constraints on the implementation and
migration plans are identified.
There are several key dependencies that should be taken into account, such as dependencies on existing
implementations of business services and application services, or changes to them.
Once you identify the dependencies and constraints, you should group activities together based on their
dependencies to create a basis for the implementation and migration projects to be established.
Examine the relevant projects and see whether logical increments of deliverables can be identified.
The dependencies will also help to identify when the identified increments can be delivered.
To sum it up, dependencies should be used to determine the sequence of implementation, the required
coordination, and the delivery time of solution increments.
And last but not least, the assessment of these dependencies should be documented as part of the architecture
roadmap and any necessary transition architectures.
In the next step.
Confirm readiness and risk for business transformation.
You review the findings of the Business Transformation Readiness Assessment previously conducted in
phase A, and determine their impact on the architecture roadmap and the implementation and migration
strategy.
It is important to identify, classify and mitigate risks associated with the transformation effort.
Risk should be documented in the consolidated GAAP Solutions and Dependencies matrix.
As a visual aid, I have illustrated the consolidated GAAP Solutions and Dependencies matrix again.
All right, students, before we continue with the next step of phase II, let's do a quick recap of
the previous steps.
We created an implementation factor catalog, a catalog with factors impacting the architecture implementation
and migration plan.
Then we determined business constraints for the implementation.
And most important, we created a consolidated Gap Solutions and Dependencies matrix, which lists the
gaps between the target and baseline architecture with possible solutions and dependencies for the implementation
and migration.
After that, we assess the requirements, gaps, solutions and factors to identify a minimal set of
requirements that can be fulfilled with shared solutions to enhance efficiency and effective implementation
of the target architecture.
And we resolve the interoperability conflicts.
Then we looked into dependencies and determined a sequence of implementation required coordination and
delivery time of solution increments based on the dependencies.
And we identified, classified, mitigated, and documented risks associated with the transformation.
Now it's time to formulate an implementation and migration strategy before we define work packages,
transition architectures, and finally create the architecture roadmap and implementation plan.
Let's go.
The Implementation and Migration Strategy is an overall strategy to guide the implementation of the
target architecture and to structure the transition architectures.
The first activity is to determine an overall strategic approach to implementing the solutions and exploiting
opportunities.
There are three basic approaches the greenfield approach, the revolutionary approach, and the evolutionary
approach.
The green field approach describes a completely new implementation from the ground up, without any
constraints or limitations from existing infrastructure or legacy systems.
There are revolutionary approach is a radical change.
It aims to radically transform the IT landscape like you turn a light switch on and off.
For example, you set up a new system and switch it on at a certain date and switch off the old system
at the same time.
The new system replaces the old system.
And the evolutionary approach pursues a strategy of convergence where old and new systems may run parallel,
and where is a phased approach to introduce capabilities.
After you define the overall strategic approach to implement the solution, you determine an implementation
methodology addressing and mitigating the risks identified and the consolidated gap solutions and dependencies
matrix.
The most common implementation methodologies are quick win, achievable targets and the value chain
method.
The quick win method prioritizes short terme, easily achievable parts of the target architecture or
solution to generate immediate visible results or improvements.
The achievable target methods focuses on setting realistic and attainable objectives of the target architecture
or solutions within specific time frames to incrementally achieve larger goals or milestones, and the
value chain method focuses on optimizing the strategic relevant parts of the target architectural solution.
And the last sub step for this step, formulate implementation in migration strategy is to obtain an
agreement on the implementation and migration strategy.
Please note these approaches and the dependencies identified form the basis for creating the work packages,
which is our next step.
To create work packages that will realize the target architecture.
You assess the missing business capabilities identified in the architecture, vision and target architecture,
and group the various activities logically into work packages using the consolidated gap solution and
dependencies matrix and the implementation Factor catalog.
The identified top level work packages should then in turn be decomposed into increments to deliver
the capability increments.
Then you analyse and refine these work packages or increments with respect to the business transformation
issues and the strategic implementation approach.
Finally, you group the work packages into portfolios and projects within a portfolio, taking into
consideration the dependencies and the strategic implementation approach.
This light gives further recommendations for defining work packages when grouping the various activities
and gaps logically into work packages.
You need to indicate for every gap or activity whether the solution should be oriented towards a new
development, or will be based on an existing product, and or use a solution that can be purchased.
For new development.
This is a good time to determine whether the work should be conducted in-house or through a contract.
An existing system may resolve the requirement with minor enhancements.
And when considering any current system or in other words, for every system in the baseline architecture
or affected by the target architecture, you must classify as to whether it is a mainstream system that
is part of the future future information system architecture, or whether it is a system that is expected
to be replaced or modified in a three year planning horizon.
So much for the step identify and group major work packages.
The next step of the opportunities and solution phase is to identify transition architectures.
You use one or more transition architectures when you need an incremental approach to implement the
target architecture.
When considering transition architectures, please make sure that they provide measurable business value,
and remember that the time span between successive transition architectures can be different.
But how to define transition architectures?
The development of transition architectures must be based upon the preferred implementation approach.
The consolidated GAAP Solutions and Dependencies matrix, the listing of projects and portfolios, as
well as the enterprise's capacity for creating and absorbing change.
And one last hint you should implement easy activities which deliver missing capabilities prior to difficult
activities, unless there are compelling reasons.
The last step for the opportunities and solution phase.
Create the architecture, roadmap and implementation and migration plan.
You need to consolidate the work packages and transition architectures into the architecture roadmap,
which describes a timeline of the progression from the baseline architecture to the target architecture.
The timeline informs the implementation and migration plan, and the architecture roadmap framed the
migration planning in phase F.
Please ensure that the identified transition architectures and work packages have a clear set of outcomes.
The architecture roadmap must demonstrate how the selection and timeline of transition architectures
and work packages realizes.
The target architecture and the detail of the architecture roadmap should express should be expressed
as a similar level of detail to the architecture definition document developed in phase B, C, and
D.
And the implementation migration plan must demonstrate the activity necessary to realize the architecture
roadmap.
It forms the basis of the migration planning and face a clear understanding of the dependencies and
life cycle of in place.
SBS is required for an effective implementation and migration plan, and since the implementation in
migration plan from this phase forms just the basis for the migration planning in phase F.
The details must be aligned to the detail of the architecture roadmap, and be sufficient to identify
the necessary projects and resource requirements to realize the roadmap.
And as a last activity for the Opportunities and Solutions phase update the architecture, vision,
Architecture Definition Document and Architecture Requirements specification with any additional relevant
outcomes from this phase.
All right, students, that was intense.
Let me conclude by summarizing the approach of phase II.
Opportunities and solutions.
The phase II is the initial step in the creation of the implementation and migration plan, and the
TOGAF standard suggests four concepts to transitioning from developing a target architecture to delivering
a target architecture.
The first concept is the architecture roadmap.
The architecture roadmap lists work packages and a timeline that will realize the target architecture.
The second concept is work packages.
Work packages group changes that are necessary to realize the target architecture.
And the third concept, the transition architectures, which define a significant state between the
baseline and the target architecture.
In other words, words an interim target architecture.
And last but not least, the implementation and migration plan, which is a schedule of projects that
will realize the target architecture or in other words, that deliver the work packages.
However, if you look at the ADM cycle, you will notice that there is a whole phase for migration,
namely phase F migration planning.
Please note that phase E Opportunities and solutions only initializes the implementation and migration
plan, and that phase F migration planning picks up the plan again, details it, and finalizes it.
We will dive into safe migration planning right in the next lesson.
But before that, let's take a quick look at the outcome, the knowledge gained, and the outputs of
phase.
Essentially with face E, you get an understanding of the solution and how to deliver it.
The outcome is a set of work packages that address the set of gaps, with an indication of value produced
and effort required, and dependencies between the work packages to reach the adjusted target.
The gained knowledge is about the dependencies between the work packages and gaps, as well as the value,
effort and risk associated with each change in work package.
And last but not least, you know how stakeholders priority and preference adjust in response to value,
effort, and risk of change.
The outputs.
First of all, phase generates refined and updated versions of the architecture vision phase deliverables.
You enhance the architecture vision with the definition and types and degrees of interoperability,
and update the statement of architecture work if necessary.
Then you get an updated draft version of the Architecture Definition document, including the baseline
and target architectures for all beaded domains.
Please note that all baseline and target architectures are approved at this point.
And as part of the step determined and confirming the key corporate change attributes, you get a capability
assessment of the transition capabilities of the involved organization units.
Continuing with the three most important outputs for phase E.
The architecture roadmap, including work packages, transition architectures, and implementation recommendations.
And last but not least, a draft version of the implementation and migration plan, including an implementation
and migration strategy as an overall strategy to guide the implementation of the target architecture.
That's it for phase II.
In the next lesson, we are going to learn how to finalize the implementation and migration plan in
phase F migration planning.

--- Phase F: Migration Planning ---

All right.
Let's start with phase F migration planning.
Let me briefly repeat the phase on the audio track before we turn into the inputs.
In phase F migration planning, you answer the question how to move from the baseline to the target
architecture by finalizing a detailed implementation and migration plan.
Therefore, the following objectives are targeted in this phase.
First, you finalize the architecture roadmap and the supporting implementation and migration plan.
Second, you ensure that the implementation and migration plan is coordinated with the enterprise's
approach to managing and implementing change in the enterprise's overall change portfolio.
And third, you ensure that the business value and cost of work packages and transition architectures
is understood by the key stakeholders, so you communicate the costs and the benefits.
Coming to the inputs.
The non-architectural inputs are the same as in the beta phases.
The main input for phase F migration planning are the last three bullet points, and are the result
from the previous phase E, the draft version of the architecture roadmap with the work packages, transition
architectures and Implementation Factor Catalog, the capability assessment and the implementation and
migration plan, including the high level implementation and migration strategy.
Of course, you can also use all other artifacts and deliverables created in the ADM cycle as required.
Let's get a rough overview of the steps involved in migration planning.
Before we go into detail.
Phase F is all about finalizing the implementation migration plan.
The steps to achieve these goals are as follows.
First, you need to confirm management framework interactions for the implementation and migration plan.
In other words, you make sure that the implementation and migration plan is coordinated with the other
management frameworks that are used in the enterprise, and which you need for a successful change.
For example, they use business planning, they use enterprise architecture, they use project or portfolio
management, and they use operations management frameworks.
Second, you need to assign a business value to each work package and estimate resource requirements,
project timings and availability, as well as delivery vehicles so you clarify the resources and dependencies
needed.
Then you take care of the migration order.
You prioritize the migration projects to the conduct of a cost benefit assessment and risk validation,
and you confirm the architecture roadmap and update the architecture definition document.
Last but not least, you complete the implementation and migration plan and very important, you complete
the architecture development cycle and document lessons learned.
Please remember the last aspect.
You complete the architecture development cycle and document lessons learned in phase F migration planning.
Let's take a closer look at the individual steps.
The Step confirmed management framework interactions for implementation in Migration plan is about coordinating
the implementation and migration plan with the management frameworks within the organization.
There are typically four management frameworks that have to work closely together for the implementation.
Migration plan to succeed.
The business planning that conceives, directs, and provides the resources for all of the activities
required to achieve concrete business objectives and outcomes.
The the enterprise architecture that structures and gives context to all enterprise activities, delivering
concrete business outcomes primarily but not exclusively in the IT domain.
And the next framework is the project portfolio management that coordinates, designs and builds the
business systems that deliver the concrete business outcomes.
And lastly, the operations management that integrates, operates and maintains the deliverables that
deliver the concrete business outcomes.
It is important that you understand the frameworks used within your organization, and ensure that the
implementation and migration plan is integrated or coordinated with the plans of each one of these frameworks.
The outcome of this step may be that the implementation and migration plan is part of a different plan
from one of the other frameworks.
The next step is to assign a business value to each work package.
First, you need to establish what constitutes business value within the organization and how value
can be measured.
Then you establish and assign a business value to each of the work packages.
Based on the work packages and the business value, you identify the projects that will be part of the
implementation and migration plan.
And finally, you estimate the business value for each project and project increment using the business
Value Assessment technique.
At the end of the day, the value of a project is just the aggregation of the value of the individual
work packages.
The figure shows the business value assessment technique as a matrix with a value dimension and a risk
dimension.
The circle represents projects or projects increments where the project size is indicated by the size
of the circle, and the project status is indicated with a color coding on top.
The value index should include criteria such as compliance to principles, financial contribution,
strategic alignment and competitive position.
The risk index should include a criteria such as size and complexity, technology, organizational capacity,
and impact of a failure.
Each criterion should be assigned an individual way.
The index and its criteria are weighing, should be developed and approved by senior management.
In my opinion, the TOGAF standard has not done a good job here.
The Togar standard recommends to estimate the business value for each project and project increment
using the business Business Value Assessment technique, but the Business Value Assessment technique
is just a matrix to visualize the business values and risks of a project, and does not help you estimating
the business value of a work package or project.
The technique is therefore not suitable for determining business value, and the challenge lies in estimating
the business value, not visualizing it.
In this respect, you must use other common techniques to estimate the business value.
Assigning business value to work packages addresses several issues.
Consider the strategic fit when approving new projects and determining the value.
Define business value to allocate resources to determine whether a project proceeds.
Is delayed or is cancelled.
Define success of a project and or increment with critical success factors and the tile, and get sign
off of return of investment criteria and use measure of effectiveness as a performance criteria and
approve and monitor the transition to the transformation progress with performance evaluation criteria.
But let's move on and answer the question of why it is so important to assign a business value to each
work package or project.
You assign business value to make trade off decisions, approve the target architecture, assign budget
and weigh up costs, risks, and benefits.
Decision makers, stakeholders, AEA practitioners and implementers need to know the business value.
Decision makers allocate a budget to projects and budget is usually a limited resource.
It is therefore important that they know the business value in order to make the right budget allocations.
The business value is also an important criteria to decide whether a project proceeds is delayed or
cancelled.
Stakeholders usually decide and approve the architecture.
How is a stakeholder supposed to make trade off decisions or approve architectures if they don't know
the business value and can't weigh the cost, risks and benefits of the work packages that deliver the
architecture.
You need to ensure that the business value and cost of work packages and transition architectures is
understood by key stakeholders.
Therefore, you have to communicate the costs and the benefits.
An effectively communicated architecture is one that provides confidence.
And you, as an enterprise architecture practitioner, have a major interest in business value as well.
Your job is to guard and realize value during the architecture development.
You define target architectures that are valuable to the business.
You plan transition architectures that deliver continuous business value.
You create an implementation and migration plan based on business value.
And once the architecture is implemented, you ensure that the architecture realizes the business value
by setting up a value realization process.
It is therefore vital for the success of your work that you know the business value of your architectures,
work packages and projects and those carrying out the projects.
The implementers must also understand the project and its role in producing value and know which work
packages and gaps they are responsible for, and what dependencies exist with other work packages and
projects.
So much for business value.
Let's continue to the next step.
The step estimate, resource requirements, project timings and availability and delivery vehicles determines
the required resources and times for each project and the increments, and provides the initial cost
estimates.
The cost should be broken down into capital costs to create the capability and operations and maintenance
costs to run and sustain the capability.
You assign required resources to each activity and aggregate them at the project increment and project
level.
You should also keep an eye out for opportunities.
You should identify opportunities where the cost associated with delivering new or better capabilities
can be offset by decommissioning existing systems.
Unfortunately, the TOGAF standard does not offer much more content on the subject of cost estimation.
Here, you have to fall back on the method set of your organization.
In the last two steps, you estimated the business value as well as the required resources and costs.
Now is the time to compare the costs with the benefits and prioritize the migration projects, taking
the risk into account.
The corresponding step is prioritize the migration projects through the conduct of a cost benefit assessment
and risk validation.
In this step, you prioritize the projects by comparing the business value against their costs.
The approach is to first determine as clearly as possible the net benefit of all of the FBS delivered
by the projects, and then verify that the risks have been effectively mitigated and factored in.
Afterwards, the intent is to gain the requisite consciousness to create a prioritized list of projects
that will provide the basis for resource allocation.
During this step, it is also important to review the risks to ensure that the risk for the project
deliverables have been mitigated as much as possible, and update the project list with risk related
comments.
You should formally review the risk assessment and revise it as necessary, ensuring that there is a
full understanding of the residual risk associated with the prioritization and the projected funding
line.
After any changes to the prioritization of the migration projects or projects, increments have arisen
as a result of the cost benefit assessment.
You must update the architecture roadmap and the architecture definition document and confirm the new
roadmap.
You do this in step confirm architecture roadmap and update architecture definition document.
To do this, you assess the ideal time spans between transition architectures based on increments,
value, capability and risk and update the architecture roadmap, including any transition architectures
ensuring alignment to the detail of the architecture definition document to visualize the proposed state
of the domain architectures at various levels of detail, you can use the Transition Architecture State
Evolution table.
After that, you align projects and transition architectures using architecture definition increment
table.
If the implementation approach has shifted as a result of confirming the implementation increments.
You also have to update the architecture definition document.
This may include assigning project objectives and aligning projects and their deliverables with the
transition architectures to create an architecture definition increments table.
Finally, you revise the architecture roadmap by consolidating the increments by project.
Let's have a look at the mentioned transition Architecture state evolution table and the architecture
definition increments table.
Both of these tables are techniques for migration planning.
The Transition Architecture State Evolution table allows you to show the proposed state of the architectures
at various levels.
It uses solution building blocks to create a relationship between the transition architectures and the
affected services or capabilities and domains.
The figure shows an example of an architecture state evolution table with three transition architectures.
Let's look at how the solution building blocks for the service information exchange services in the
subdomain infrastructure applications.
Changes over time in Transition Architecture one.
The service information exchange is supported by a solution building block called Solution System A.
The solution system A will be replaced with a transition solution called Solution system B1.
This state is defined within the transition architecture two.
But solution system B1 is also just an intermediate state and will be transitioned into the final solution
called solution system B2 in the transition architecture three.
I personally prefer color coding in which the new or to be retained solution building blocks are colored
green.
The SBS to be transferred to a new solution are colored yellow, and the SBS to be replaced are colored
red.
The architecture Definition increments table helps to plan a series of transitioning architectures outlining
the status of the enterprise architecture at specified times.
The figure shows an example of an architecture definition.
Increments table.
In this table, you list the projects, their timings and assign the incremental deliverables across
the transition architectures.
I personally do prefer a graphical representation of the business, data, application or technology
architecture to visually highlight the changes.
After finalizing the architecture roadmap and the Architecture Definition document, it is time to complete
the implementation and migration plan.
We initialized in phase.
Much of the detail for the plan has already been gathered, and this step brings it all together using
accepted planning and management techniques.
In this step you integrate all projects, project plans, activities, internal and external dependencies
and impact of change into the implementation and migration plan.
The detail of the implementation in migration plan should be expressed at a similar level of detail
to the architecture Definition document developed in phase B and.
If the implementation projects require a higher level of detail, it may be necessary to iterate another
admm cycle.
Specifically, a transition planning iteration between the admm phases E and f is recommended.
However, there is a separate lesson on Admm iteration cycles.
And finally, to summarize the contents of the implementation migration plan, I have provided you with
a table of contents for an implementation and migration plan.
Have a look.
Hang in there.
Almost done.
Now, the last step of phase F migration planning.
Complete the architecture development cycle and document the lessons learned.
You may be wondering why this step is called complete the architecture Development cycle.
If this phase is followed by two more phases phase G implementation governance and phase H change management.
Well, that's because the architecture development has been completed and the projects are now implementing
the architecture and phase G implementation.
Governance runs parallel to the implementation projects, and phase H change management is a holding
phase where you've done all your architecture work, planning and implementation and waiting for changes
to happen.
Therefore, the architecture development cycle is completed after this step in phase F migration planning
the step complete the architecture development cycle and document lessons learned.
Transitions.
Governance from the development of the architecture to the realization of the architecture.
If the maturity of the architecture capability warrants and implementation governance model may be produced.
And the most important activity in this step capture lessons and insights learned during the development
of the architecture.
The lessons and insights learned are input for phase change management to managing the architecture
capability.
All clear.
Students, I've tortured you long enough for the steps for phase F migration planning.
Let me briefly summarize the approach to migration planning.
Again, one of the most important things is to create a detailed implementation and migration plan with
project and portfolio managers because they will deliver the target architecture or at least coordinate
the delivery.
To do this, you need to finalize the implementation and migration plan based on the draft architecture
roadmap and draft implementation and migration plan from phase E, and enrich the plan with portfolio
and project level details.
Afterwards, you integrate the roadmap, the implementation and migration plan with the enterprise's
other change activities and assess the dependencies, costs and benefits of various migration projects.
Finally, to complete the architecture development cycle, you conduct a lessons learned workshop and
document the outcome to enable continuous process improvement.
Let's have a quick view at the outcome knowledge and outputs.
We now have an approved set of projects to reach the adjusted target architecture containing objectives,
constraints, resources required and start and finish date.
And we know the available resources as well as how stakeholder priority and preference adjust in response
to value, effort, and risk of change.
This slide shows the output of phase F.
As you may notice, all outputs are now finalized or confirmed.
The implementation and migration plan, the Architecture Definition document, the Architecture Requirements
Specification and the architecture Roadmap.
They are all approved.
Other notable outputs that can arise are a request for architecture work that triggers a new ADM iteration,
for instance a transition planning iteration.
And a change request for the architecture capabilities that may arise as a result of the lessons learned.
Reusable architecture.
Building blocks are also an output of phase F, as the target architecture contains them and is approved.
Please note that we do not generate reusable SP, as the solution still needs to be developed through
implementation projects, and if the architecture capability has allowed it, an implementation governance
model has also been created.
All right students, so much for phase F migration planning.
Let me summarize briefly.
Completing this phase, you planned the transformation from the baseline to the target architecture
with the migration and implementation plan.
We have also ensured that the transformation is coordinated with the business, clearing the way for
the implementation projects to deliver the architecture.
The task now is to ensure that the implementation projects deliver the defined target architecture and
do not deviate from it, or if the projects have to deviate for certain reasons, that we at least know
about it and control the deviation.
And that's what the subsequent phase G implementation governance is responsible for, which we will
look at in the next lesson.

--- Phase G: Implementation Governance ---

Phase G implementation.
Governance.
Let's go.
The target architecture is approved.
The architecture roadmap and the implementation and migration plan is finalized.
Now it is time for the implementation projects to deliver the target architecture or increment to what
the target architecture.
And face G.
Implementation.
Governance provides an architectural oversight of the implementation and ensures the compliance of the
implementation projects with the defined architectures.
During this phase, you perform appropriate architecture governance functions for the solution and any
implementation driven architecture change requests.
The non-architectural inputs are not spectacular.
The request for architecture work and the capability assessment.
All relevant information from the architecture development, as well as information from your architecture
repository is available to you as architectural input.
Worth mentioning is the organizational model for enterprise Architecture.
The architecture governance framework and the implementation governance model.
With the organizational model for enterprise architecture, you find definition of boundaries between
different enterprise architecture practitioners and the governance relationships that span across these
boundaries, as well as governance and support strategy of your organization.
The Architecture Governance Framework is the approach processes, cultural orientation and a set of
owned responsibilities of your organization that ensures the integrity and effectiveness of the organization's
architectures.
With the Architecture Governance framework, you will find general governance related processes like
policy management, compliance monitoring and reporting, as well as content like the general organizational
structure of the governance environment.
And then the implementation governance model you will find projects, specific governance processes,
organization structures, roles and responsibilities, checkpoints and success or failure criterias
that may derive from the architecture governance framework.
So these inputs are valuable for this phase.
But how do you fulfill the governance function during phase G?
Implementation governance.
You need to understand that phase G runs parallel to the implementation projects.
So there may be several implementation projects implementing the target architecture and solutions step
by step.
And your responsibility is to control and direct the development project so that the implementation
is compliant with the target architecture.
You can control the development project by confirming the scope and the priorities for the deployment
with the development management, for example, by reviewing migration planning outputs and give recommendations
on the deployment.
Or you can identify needed deployment resources and skills and guide the development of solutions.
Deployment.
By formulating recommendations for the implementation and deployment projects, you should also perform
enterprise architecture compliance reviews, implement business and IT operations.
And last but not least, once the solution is fully deployed, you perform post implementation reviews
and close the implementation to make sure that the actual implementation is compliant with the target
architecture.
Let's take a closer, closer look at the individual steps.
In this step.
Confirm scope and priorities for deployment.
With development management, you review the migration planning outputs like the architecture roadmap
and the implementation migration plan and give recommendations on deployment.
You identify enterprise architecture priorities for development teams, deployment issues and building
blocks to be replaced or updated.
And the most important activity of this step is to perform a gap analysis of the enterprise architecture
and solution framework, the gaps in the existing Enterprise Solutions framework, as well as the required
steps to fill the gaps, need to be identified.
These SBS may have a 1 to 1 or many to one relationship with the projects.
The solution architects needs to define exactly how this will be done, and if there is more than one
project working on these same capabilities, the solution architect needs to ensure that they can leverage
best value from these investments.
In the step.
Identify deployment resources and skills you need to educate the development teams in enterprise architecture.
Identify system development methods required for solutions development, and ensure that the systems
development method enables feedback to the architecture teams on designs.
Let me give you an example.
Perhaps you have two or more development teams in your organization, and one or more external development
and implementation service providers who work together to develop your solutions and target architecture.
One team works on a system according to scrum and releases new features monthly, while the other team
works on another system according to a waterfall model and works with half yearly release cycles.
The external development partner works with Agile release train.
You need to identify these three different development methods and coordinate them so that there are
no conflicts and you can't attend every scrum meeting or release train synchronization meeting either.
However, you must be informed about what has been developed, where and how in order to fulfill your
governance function and ensure that the right thing is developed and that the development also corresponds
to the target architecture.
Moving on with the step guide development for solution deployment in your governance function, you
should formulate project recommendation and for each individual implementation and deployment project,
you should document the impact of changes.
For instance, if there is a request for functional changes or a change for a schedule in one project,
you need to assess and document the impact on the other projects.
And one of the most important activities of this step is to document the architecture contract.
The architecture contract is one of the simplest means at your disposal to ensure that the implementation
matches the target architecture.
The Architecture contract is a joint agreement between development partners and sponsors on the deliverables,
quality and fitness for purpose of the architecture.
And as the implementation projects deliver solutions.
Your job is to update the enterprise continuum directory and repository for solution with these solution
building blocks.
Another responsibility is to guide the development of business and IT operating models for services.
Perhaps the project will develop a solution that can also be used as a service.
Service means that the IT department provides the functionality to the entire organization, and that
the solution is reusable, not only for the limited use case that we are currently trying to solve,
and your job is to identify these services and guide the development.
You should also guide the definition of business and IT operational requirements.
May be the IT operations team needs specific tools for administration, or they need an integration
and test environment next to the production environment.
These are all operational requirements and you can help and guide the definition.
And since the applications required for IT operations are usually not yet part of the target architecture,
you should carry out a gap analysis and ensure that these are integrated in the target architecture.
Last but not least, you produce the implementation plan.
At this stage, it is more like a rollout plan and contains even more details than the implementation
and migration plan that we created in phase F migration planning.
Let's continue with the next step.
Perform enterprise architecture compliance review.
One of the main tasks in facing implementation governance is to conduct enterprise architecture compliance
reviews.
You review ongoing implementation, governance and architecture compliance for each building block.
This means that you check that the solution blocks also provide the functions as specified in the architecture
definition document and the architecture contract.
This is best done while the solutions are being developed by the the latest during testing and implementation.
You also conduct post development reviews and close the development of deployment projects once the
solutions are developed and compliant.
Please note at this point, the solutions do not yet have to be deployed in productive, but the development
must be completed, completed and compliant.
Now we come to implementation, deployment and going live.
This step is called Implement business and IT operations.
And there are two main activities.
First to carry out the deployment projects including IT service delivery, implementation, business
service delivery, implementation, skills development and training implementation and communications
documentation publication.
And once the solution is live, your baseline architecture has changed.
The solution, which was previously part of the target architecture, has now been implemented and is
part of the new baseline architecture.
You must therefore update and publish the new baseline architectures to the architecture repository
and update other impacted repositories such as Operational Configuration Management stores.
All right.
The last step of Facg implementation governance.
Perform post implementation review and close the implementation.
The implementations are completed.
The solutions have been deployed successfully.
The TOGAF standard suggests to conduct a post implementation review to make sure that everything works
as expected.
My personal opinion on this too much review.
We have had reviews of the solution building blocks and we have had post development reviews.
Then the implementation team has certainly checked everything during the go live and ensure proper operation
in a hyper care phase.
We also have the Architecture Definition document, the Architecture Requirements Specification and
the Architecture contract to ensure compliance.
And now the architect is to carry out another post implementation review.
In my opinion, more trust should be placed in the implementation projects and the personal responsibility
of the employees instead of double and triple checking everything on the basis of reviews.
Let's get back to topic.
A second sub step is to publish the reviews that have been carried out and close the projects.
In this sub step, you go back to the stakeholders and the architecture board and so on, and confirm
that the review has been carried out and that the target architecture has been deployed and that everything
is working according to the specification.
Finally, the closure on phase G will be when the solutions are fully deployed.
Once in this sentence, we should pay particular attention to the word once.
There will be always changes and bug fixes, but that is the job of the operations team.
All right, students, let's take a look at the general approach for facing the TOGAF standard suggests
to deploy the target architecture as a series of transitions, meaning that you perform incremental
steps toward the target architecture, where each step delivers business value.
With this incremental approach, you ensure early realization of business value and benefits, as well
as minimizing risks in the transformation and migration program, it is also important that you establish
an implementation program that will enable the delivery of the transition architectures to adopt a phase
deployment schedule that reflects the business priorities embodied in the architecture roadmap, and
that you follow the organization's established portfolio or program management approach.
Please do not reinvent the wheel.
Instead, use the existing management mechanisms.
Please make also sure to define an operations framework to ensure the effective long life of the deployed
solution.
You don't want to accompany a solution where no one is responsible for running and developing the solution
after implementation.
And lastly, develop details for the implementation project.
For instance, the project name, the project description, the acceptance criteria and measures of
effectiveness.
And finally an important statement about phase G.
Phase G implementation governance establishes the connection between architecture and implementation
organization through the architecture contract.
Speaking of the architecture contract, let's talk about the architecture contract and the architecture
requirements specification.
Both concepts help you to govern implementation projects.
The architecture contract are joint agreements between development partners and sponsors on the deliverables,
quality and fitness.
For purpose of an architecture.
It is used to direct and control the implementation team to work towards a deliberate future, and provides
a means to test compliance and the Architecture Requirements specification is a set of quantitative
statements that outline what an implementation project must do in order to comply with the architecture.
In terms of governance, it is used to direct and control the creativity and the value realization of
the implementation team.
You can test the design, implementation and other change choices from the implementation team against
the architecture requirements specification.
In a nutshell, the architecture contract helps to test compliance.
The Architecture Requirements specification helps to test design, implementation and change choices.
Both therefore support the the governance of implementation projects.
I hope you know that the ADM is not a method for software development.
The ADM is a method for developing and managing the life cycle of an enterprise architecture.
But since agile software development is currently a major topic, the TOGAF standard is positioning
itself in this regard.
The statement is that the TOGAF standard aligns to agile development in phase three implementation governance,
where the Enterprise Architect serves the stakeholders regarding the mission, vision, goals and investment
roadmap.
For short, the architect is guarding enterprise value.
And so I would like to insert the learning objective here in facing how an architecture enables alignment
to the organizational objects using agile development.
A good architecture with different purposes of level of details can be applied to support agile software
development.
Therefore, you can apply architecture to support agile software development.
An architecture to support folio defines the enterprise backlog, identifies which products the enterprise
needs, points out the boundary of the products, supports the portfolio or project, and defines what
constraints are Product Owner has.
The architecture provides a set of constraints that limits the choices of the agile team.
Okay, now we know how an enterprise architecture supports agile software development.
But what is the role of the enterprise architect in phase three to align the architecture with the organizational
objectives?
Abstractly speaking, the A practitioner manages innovation, creativity and circumstances.
You provide useful support of the change activity with the stakeholders preference and priority driving
the architecture development.
You perform risk management and find, expose and mitigate uncertainty associated with the objectives
and benefits of a project.
You facilitate good decision making in the context of enterprise benefits realization and as you may
know, decisions are often made in agile software development decisions about features, decisions about
prioritization, and so on.
You as an architect support the decision making process and always have the architecture and benefits
in mind.
And you have the stakeholders and implementers to understand the implications of the choices.
Okay.
Let's conclude this implementation governance by taking a look at the outcome knowledge and outputs.
The output and knowledge is straightforward.
The outcome is the completion of the implementation projects, and we gain knowledge about the purpose
and constraints of the implementation team.
What are they doing?
How do they create value?
Which gap between baseline and target architecture do they close, and what are the supporting pillars
that they must not tear down, and so on.
The outputs are more interesting.
I've tried to sort them into a logical, chronological order.
First, you create the sign architecture contract for the development between development partners and
sponsors.
Then you assess the compliance of the implementation projects.
You assess the compliance of the building blocks, perform a post development and a post implementation
review.
Then the main result the architecture compliance solutions are developed, implemented and deployed.
Please note the implemented system is actually an output from the implementation projects and the development
process, not an output of your architecture work in phase three.
However, given the importance of this output, it is stated here as an output of the EDM.
The direct involvement of the architecture staff in implementation will vary according to the organization
policy.
But in our role as architects, we support the implementation projects.
We help to draw up the service level agreements, create business and IT operating models, and make
recommendations on performance metrics and service delivery requirements.
With these solutions, we have now also created our reusable building blocks to complete the implementation.
It is important to update the document landscape.
You update the architecture vision, the architecture definition document and the architecture repository.
Post implementation you update the new baseline architecture, the building blocks, changes that occurred
during implementation, and so on.
Change requests can also arise during phase G, which you then collect in accordance with phase H architecture,
change management and initiate a new EDM cycle as soon as there are enough change requests.
While we are on subject of change requests, let's jump straight in to the next phase H architecture.
Change management.

--- Phase H: Architecture Change Management ---

The last phase of the Adme cycle phase.
Age architecture.
Change management.
In this phase, you establish procedures for managing change to the new architectures.
This phase has three objectives.
First, to ensure that the architecture development cycle is maintained.
Second, to ensure that the architecture governance framework is executed.
And third, to ensure that the enterprise architecture capability meets current requirements.
Non-architectural input is just the request for architecture work.
The most important architectural input is the change request.
Change requests trigger change management, and they can arise on both the technology and the business
side.
Technology change requests can arise, for instance, when a new technology is announced or when the
management initiates an asset management cost reduction initiative, or when a technology gets withdrawn.
Business change requests can arise from new business developments, business exceptions or innovations,
as well as from strategic change developments.
There are many reasons for change requests.
I can still remember that in 2019, a well known software manufacturer changed the license conditions
for a frequently used product and the product suddenly became chargeable.
By looking at the outputs per phase in the ADM, you can identify that change requests formally occur
in phase F migration.
Planning and implementation.
Governance.
In phase F migration planning change requests for architecture capability may arise from the formal
step complete the architecture development cycle and documents lessons learned and during implementation
of an architecture.
As more facts become known, it is possible that the original architecture, definition and requirements
are not suitable or are not sufficient to complete the implementation of a solution.
In these circumstances, it is necessary for implementation projects to either deviate from the suggested
architectural approach or to request scope.
Extensions in these circumstances are.
Change requests may be submitted in order to kick start a further cycle of architecture work.
Regardless of where the change request originates, you assess the change requests in phase architecture,
change management and decide whether to update the architecture or kick off a new ADM cycle.
The TOGAF standard mentions further architectural inputs.
For the sake of completeness, I have listed them again, but let's continue directly with the change
request and explain what these are formally.
As I mentioned earlier, a change request is an opportunity to extend and refine the architecture during
its implementation.
The purpose of change request is to describe the deviation from the suggested architectural approach,
for instance, a scope change, changes in requirements, or change of a solution.
A change request is created on the basis of knowledge gained, for instance, during implementation
or due to external factors such as a change in business strategy and a change request.
Kick starts a further cycle of architecture work, but what is the content of a change request?
A description and a rationale for the proposed change.
An impact assessment where you reference the requirements.
Assess the impact on stakeholder priority.
Highlight the ADM phases that need to be revisited, or recommendations on management of requirements.
And if possible, you add a repository reference number.
This means that everyone who reads through the change request can also view the facts in the architecture
or repository.
On this slide, I would like to show you a brief excerpt of a template for a change request with the
most important information.
You see basic details in a table, for instance, an ID title and requester for the change, followed
by a chapter to describe the changes and a chapter to describe the change.
Rationale and impacts.
Enough with change requests.
Let's turn our attention to face architecture.
Change management.
Phase H is basically a holding phase.
You've done all your architecture work.
The solutions are developed, implemented and deployed, and you wait for changes to happen.
And when there are changes, you decide whether the changes are enough to kick off a new ADM cycle.
The steps for phase H architecture change management are the following.
You ensure that the architecture achieves its original target business value by establishing a value
realization process.
You make sure that you get the value you thought you would get.
For example, if you have decided that the target architecture to shut down an application, that the
application is then not only shut down, but also the infrastructure is dismantled and the license agreements
with the manufacturer are terminated in order to save the costs.
To deploy monitoring tools, you manage risks, you provide analysis for architecture change management.
And when you see that you don't meet the performance targets, you develop change requirements to meet
the performance targets.
Part of phase H is also to manage the governance process and activate the process to implement change.
Let's go into detail.
During phase eight, you influence business projects to exploit the enterprise architecture for value
realization.
You have created an architecture to create value.
Now that the architecture is also delivered, you need to make sure that it also realizes its value.
You want to ensure that the business maximizes the value it can get out of the architecture.
And so you as an enterprise architect, you need to influence the business projects to do so.
But how can you do that?
For example, you ensure that the new solutions are used.
The second step is to deploy monitoring tools.
You ensure that monitoring tools are deployed and applied to monitor the capability, maturity and business
and technology changes which could impact the baseline architecture, and you ensure that the business
value is getting tracked.
For instance, with this investment appraisal method to determine value metrics for the business objectives,
you also ensure that monitoring tools are used to track the quality of service, performance and usage
to track and assess the asset management programs.
If there is one and very important to track the business continuity requirements, business continuity
is the capability of an organization to continue the delivery of products or services at predefined,
acceptable levels following a disruptive incident.
So if there is a malfunction, certain business functions must continue to work and you can measure
business continuity KPIs, for instance the recovery time.
The next step is to manage enterprise architecture risks and provide recommendations for IT strategy.
If, for example, you notice that your software versions are out of date or you hear about new security
vulnerabilities in the news, you can review your architecture and inform the relevant stakeholders.
Or if a license model has changed again, you should control this accordingly and thus manage the risk
of license violations.
You may notice such risks in your monitoring role in phase H.
The next step is to provide analysis for architecture change management.
Within this step, you analyze the performance of your architecture and conduct e performance reviews
with service management and realize whether changes are necessary due to poor performance or not.
To do this, you undertake gap analysis of the performance of the enterprise architecture.
Is the performance of the delivered enterprise architecture in accordance with the requirements?
Do we need to change the architecture to reach the performance goals?
These are the questions you analyze in this step and the most important of all, you assess change requests
and ensure adherence to architecture governance.
When a change requests come through, you have to assess if they require a change to the architecture,
what is the impact on the architecture, and so on.
And you ensure that the change is processed in accordance with the architecture.
Governance.
Finally the last step for this slide, but not for phase change management.
The step to develop change requirements to meet performance targets.
If your architecture is not delivering the value it promised, you recommend, change requirements to
meet the performance targets.
And the next step is to manage the governance process.
You need to ensure that the architecture governance framework is executed.
Therefore, you arrange meetings of the Architecture Board and hold the meeting of the Architecture
Board with the aim of the meeting to decide on handling changes.
So if there are any changes, you submit them to the architecture board and present them for a decision.
And the last step is to activate the process to implement change.
Once the change is approved and the change requires a new development or redevelopment of the architecture,
you produce a request for architecture work to kick off a new admm cycle.
If the change can be implemented without changing the architecture, you just give the go to the implementation
team to deliver the change anyways.
Most of the time you need resources and therefore you write a request for investment.
But please make sure that any changes are documented in the architecture repository.
That's it for the steps of phase change management.
Let's recap the approach.
The face architecture.
Change management is very closely related to the architecture, governance processes and the architecture
contract.
The change management process determines two things.
First, the circumstances under which the enterprise architecture or part of it will be permitted to
change after implementation, and the process by which that will happen.
And second, the circumstances under which the enterprise architecture development cycle will be initiated
again to develop a new architecture.
Therefore, you need to establish criteria to judge whether a change request warrants and architecture
updates or warrants starting a new cycle of ADM.
To do this, you judge the changes on the business value.
You need to establish procedures for managing change.
Part of this procedure is to define the content of a change request and classify change, as already
mentioned, for the content of a change request.
The TOGAF standard to suggest to describe a change with three attributes.
The description of the proposed change, the rationale for the proposed change, and the impact assessment
of the proposed change.
For the change classification, the TOGAF standard recommends three types of changes a simplification
change that can be handled via the available change management techniques.
An incremental change that may require partial re-architecting, and a re-architecting change that requires
a new architecture development cycle.
As already mentioned, for the incremental change and re-architecting change, it is your responsibility
to create a new request for architecture work to kick off a new ADM cycle.
Let us now take a closer look at the role of the architect in this phase.
Phase H demands the practitioner to guide and constrain change decisions.
Phase H provides ongoing review of value realization and monitoring of change, and since change and
failure to realize value provide entry points to the ADM, most architecture work is initiated from
phase H.
US and EEA practitioner are responsible and accountable for the stability and integrity of the architecture.
Your job is to guide and constrain change decisions, but be aware.
Don't get into the details of implementation.
Your sole purpose is to influence and guide the change.
You also allocate work packages according to the capability and readiness of the enterprise, and guide
the allocation of funds for exploratory work packages.
You also monitor work packages, trigger reviews, trade off decisions and portfolio governance as.
Please keep in mind that the enterprise architecture is developed to guide effective change, and change
can only happen when there are resources available.
Every enterprise has a business cycle that plans and allocates resources normally one fiscal year.
The fiscal year dates are inflexible and decisions will be made with the data available and reasonable
judgment.
Therefore, it is very important to align the completion dates of the architectures to the dates where
the key business decisions are made.
Your architecture to support strategy must be finished before the budget planning activities.
Otherwise, the budget planning and decision making cannot be based on your strategic architecture.
So make sure that your architecture supports the budget planning.
Once you influence the budget planning, the path forward is set.
Then it is important again that you support the budget control activity.
You are the agent for the stakeholder, for the implementation team and the subject matter expert for
the portfolio manager in validating the progress earned to value.
Finally outcome knowledge and outputs.
The outcome of phase H is the direction to proceed and start developing a target architecture that addresses
perceived real or anticipated shortfalls in the enterprise relative to stakeholder preferences you know
in which direction the enterprise should develop and you know the gaps between the approved target and
the realization from prior work.
And you know, the changes in preference or priority of your stakeholders, or in other words, the
changed stakeholder requirements.
Face H generates output for maintenance changes or major changes.
Outputs for maintenance changes are small architecture updates, changes to the statement of architecture
work, to compliance assessments, to the architecture framework and the principles and the contract.
The output for major changes is a request for architecture work which initiates a new architecture development
cycle.

--- Requirements Management Phase ---

Dear students, thank you so much for holding out for so long.
One more face to go.
Let's turn our attention to the face in the center of the Adme cycle, the requirements management phase.
As the name suggests, the phase requirements management manages architecture requirements throughout
the adme.
As you may have noticed, the requirements management phase sits in the center of the Adme cycle, has
no letter as a prefix, and is connected with every other phase of the Adme cycle except the preliminary
phase.
The central position and the connection to every other phase of the ADM cycle is because requirements
management is constantly running during the ADM cycle, and can be considered as the phase driving the
ADM.
The phase ensures that the requirements management process is sustained and operates for all relevant
ADM phases.
Furthermore, the phase manager's architecture requirements identified during any execution of the admm
cycle or a phase, and ensures that relevant architecture requirements are available for use by each
phase at the phase is executed.
The most important input for the requirements management phase is of course requirements.
The architecture requirements are documented in the Architecture Requirements Specification.
Furthermore, you may have an requirements impact assessment.
You can also find requirements in the populated architecture repository more precisely in the requirements
repository.
During the architecture vision phase, new requirements generated for future architecture work within
the scope of the architecture projects are documented within the architecture requirements specification
and new requirements which are beyond the scope are input to the requirements repository for management
throughout the requirements management process.
You might even find requirements in the statement of architecture work and in the architecture vision.
But in my opinion, these should all already be consolidated by the architecture team in the architecture
requirement specification.
Requirements can also be documented in the organizational model for enterprise architecture, for example.
Budget requirements.
The Togo Standard places requirements management and stakeholder engagement at the centre of the architecture
development.
Practitioners develop the architecture in accordance with the preferences and priorities of their organization,
stakeholders or in other words, according to their requirements.
As an architect, please act in accordance with the following principles.
Architecture is never sold to a stakeholder.
Stakeholder preferences and requirements are never manipulated.
Effective requirements.
Management is dependent upon clear traceability from the organization's vision, mission, business
model, and strategies through the most detailed statement of requirement and effective engagement is
based upon effective communication using views and viewpoints.
Different stakeholders have different concerns about the architecture.
These concerns must be addressed and represented effectively to the stakeholders to enable the stakeholders
to approve the architecture, and stakeholders will only confirm an architecture that fulfills their
requirements.
Let's take a look at the steps of the requirements phase and understand how the TOGAF standard recommends
embedding requirements management.
Basically, you alternate between the requirements management phase and the ADM phases.
You identify the requirements in the ADM phases by analyzing business goals and scenarios, management
information, value streams, and user experience, and you document the requirements in the Architecture
Requirements Specification and the Requirements Repository.
Requirements that are within the scope of the current architecture project, in accordance with the
requests for the Statement of Architecture work, are documented within the architecture requirements.
Specification requirements which are beyond the scope are documented in the Requirements repository.
Then you jump to the Requirements Management phase, where you consolidate the requirements and establish
and monitor the requirements baseline.
You can picture the requirements baseline as a snapshot in time that contains all agreed, reviewed,
and approved requirements.
After you established the requirements baseline, you wait until new or changed requirements are identified
in an ADM phase.
You add new requirements and modify or remove existing requirements in the ADM phases.
You also reassess requirements.
Priorities once a new, changed or removed requirement arises from an ADM phase, you go back to the
requirements management phase to record the new requirements priorities.
Identify and solve any conflicts that may occur with the new change requirements, and generate a requirements
impact statement for steering the architecture team.
It is again the task of the adme phases to assess the impact of change on previous and current adme
phases, to decide whether to implement the change or defer to a later adme cycle.
To issue the requirements impact statements.
And if you decide to implement the change in the current Adme cycle and to implement the requirements
arising from phase architecture change management.
As I explained earlier in this lesson about phase change management, minor maintenance changes and
requirements that do not require any reworking of the architecture and therefore don't need a request
for architecture work can be implemented directly.
In this case, the architect simply gives the Go signal to an implementation team and ensures the compliance
we are facg.
Implementation.
Governance.
Turning our attention back to the steps.
It is job of the requirements management phase to update the architecture requirements repository with
informations relating to the change requested, including affected stakeholder views.
The changes are implemented by implementation projects.
And last but not least, you conduct a gap analysis for past phases, identify gap requirements and
record them in the architecture requirement repository, and revise the target architecture.
The ADM describes two kinds of gaps.
The first kind of gap is something that is present in the baseline, but not in the target, for instance,
because it was eliminated by accident or design.
The second kind of gap is something that is not in the baseline, but present in the target.
For instance, new requirements.
A gap requirement is anything that has been eliminated by accident and therefore requires a change to
the target architecture.
If the gap analysis generates gap requirements, then this step will ensure that they are addressed,
documented and recorded in the architecture requirement repository and that the target architecture
is revised accordingly.
All this architecture work is job of the ADM phases and not of the requirements management phase.
Let's summarize the requirements management phase.
The ADM is continuously driven by the requirements management process.
It is a dynamic process where requirements for enterprise architecture and changes to those requirements
are identified, stored and fed into and out of the relevant ADM phases and also between cycles of ADM.
The relevant phases of the ADM disposes of addresses or prioritized requirements, not the requirements
management process.
The requirements management process just manages the requirements or changes to the requirements, and
ensures that relevant architecture requirements are available for use by each phase.
The TOGAF standard recommends to use an architecture requirements repository to record and manage all
architecture requirements at a single point of truth, and the architecture Requirement repository can
hold information from multiple ADM cycles.
Unlike the Architecture Requirement specification and the Requirements Impact assessment, these artifacts
are limited to the requirements of one ADM cycle.
The requirements management phase generates output used throughout the ADM cycle.
The two outputs of the requirements management phase are the updated Architecture Requirements specification
and the Requirements Impact Assessment.
The Architecture Requirement specification is a quantitative view of the solution stating measurable
criteria that must be met.
It provides a set of quantitative statements that outline what an implementation project must do in
order to comply with the architecture.
An architecture requirement specification will typically form a major component of an implementation
contract or contract for more detailed architecture definition.
Therefore, it is a companion to the Architecture Definition document with a complementary objective
to provide the quantitative view.
The Architecture Requirements specification contains architecture interoperability and IT service management
requirements, success measures, constraints, assumptions, business service and application service
contracts and implementation guidelines and specifications and standards.
I'm sure that you have already seen 1 or 2 requirements documents in your career.
The Architecture Requirements specification is created in phase A and completed throughout phase B to
D, you expand the architecture requirements specification phase by phase or rather domain by domain.
The requirements for business architecture, the data architecture, the application architecture and
the technology architecture.
You use the requirements explicitly in phases E to H.
Of course, you also use the requirements in phases A to D as you define a target architecture according
to the requirements in phase E.
The requirements form the basis for the solutions, and the architecture requirements specification
is updated with additional relevant outcomes.
The specification is getting finalized in phase F.
In phase G, you use the requirements to evaluate the compliance of the implementation with the requirements,
and in phase change management, you use the requirements for your performance gap analysis, where
you try to identify gaps between the requirements and the actual performance of the enterprise architecture,
and you also develop change requirements to achieve the performance targets.
Let's continue with the second output of the requirements management phase.
The requirements impact assessment.
Throughout the ADM, new information is collected relating to an architecture.
As this information is gathered, new facts may come to light that invalidate existing aspects of the
architecture.
A Requirements Impact Assessment assesses the current architecture, requirement and specification to
identify changes that should be made in the implications of those changes.
It contains phases to be revisited and to lead on requirements prioritization, including results,
recommendations on management of requirements, references to specific requirements, and stakeholder
priority and repository reference numbers.
All right, students, that's it for the architecture development method.
The heart of the toga standard.
Thank you for working with me through all the phases.
I know the toga standard is sometimes confusing and overwhelming, but I hope I've been able to shed
some light on the fog of the standard.

--- ADM Iteration ---

Designing and using an enterprise architecture is not a one time project.
The opposite is true.
Enterprise architecture is a continuous endeavor.
For this reason, the TOGAF standard supports an iterative approach.
Iterations manage the complexity of developing and maintaining an enterprise architecture according
to the open Group Architecture framework.
Iteration describes the process of first defining a comprehensive landscape through multiple ADM cycles
based upon individual projects bound to the scope of the request for architecture work for a second.
Developing an architecture where the activities described in the different ADM phases interact to produce
an integrated architecture, or third iteration, describes the process of managing change to the organization's
architecture capability.
There are even more types of iteration within the ADM.
In any case, iteration cycles group architectural activities to achieve a specific purpose.
As discussed, the architecture development iteration creates architecture content and ensures that
the architecture is considered as a role.
Architecture capability.
Iteration in turn creates an evaluates the architecture capability, the approach, the principles,
the scope, the vision, and the governance.
The architecture.
Governance iteration in turn supports governance of change activity progressing towards the target architecture.
And fifth, lastly, the transition planning iteration, which creates formal change roadmaps for a
defined architecture.
Let's take a closer look on iteration through the entire ADM architecture development, iteration and
architecture capability iteration.
When iterating through the entire architecture development method, your goal is to develop a comprehensive
enterprise architecture landscape.
In this iteration, type projects go through the ADM cycle, starting with phase A and a request for
architectural work and finishing with a changed or extended EA landscape.
Here, projects may operate their own ADM cycles concurrently with relationships to each other.
A project may trigger another project if the project identifies opportunities or solutions requiring
a detailed architecture, or if the project identifies E landscape impacts outside the request for the
architecture work.
Next we have the architecture development iteration.
That is iteration cycles within the ADM.
In this case, projects may operate multiple ADM phases concurrently, especially to manage the interrelationships
between business information systems and technology architectures.
Now, projects make cycle between ADM phases, covering multiple phases to converge on a detailed target
architecture when a high level architecture does not exist, and in this type of iteration, projects
may return to previous phases to update work products to converge on an architecture roadmap or implementation
and migration plan when requirements change.
That brings us to the architecture capability iteration.
Hence iteration cycles to the preliminary phase to manage the architecture capability.
Now, architecture projects may require a new iteration for the preliminary phase to first reestablish
aspects of the architecture capability identified in phase A, addressing a request for architecture
work.
Or second, adjust the architecture capability based on new or change requirements because of the change
request in phase H.
Let's turn to iterations in the day to day life of you, the practitioner.
Basically, the TOGAF architecture development method places key activity steps together for understanding
the activities, relationship and information flows, and the ADM provides an face for each essential
output.
The talk of crop cycle diagram you see here.
On the right side, on the slide, is a stylized path that demonstrates the essential information flow.
Don't understand this picture as a process model.
It's not a representation of activities in a sequence.
In practical terms, this means that each architecture project starts with phase A and uses an individual
ADM path.
Again.
Each architecture project starts with a different purpose and traverses a distinct path that used a
different configuration of the TOGAF ADM.
The starting point for each architecture project is phase A architecture vision.
The interdependent nature of developing and target architecture requires considering the entire architecture,
existing gaps, and resulting work.
No matter your enterprise and their stakeholders, all iteration is driven by the information needs
of the architecture project.
That means an ADM phase stays open to produce the information in required breadth, depth, time and
recency.
If information is not needed or has been produced already, the architecture project does not enter
the phase.
Many of the steps in the ADM phases can be executed simultaneously and are revisited at the appropriate
level of detail.
And lastly, phase B addresses stakeholders concerns, identifies gaps in the business architecture,
and looks at impacts across the landscape.
Proceeding to another concept in Admm iteration architecture engagement areas.
In short, enterprise architecture assists in identifying, defining, and implementing change.
Let's go through each of the three architecture engagement areas and clarify the role of enterprise
architecture.
First, the identification of required change.
Here, the architecture can provide visibility of the IT capability to support strategic decision making
and alignment of execution.
Then we have the definition of change.
The architecture can now define the nature and extent of change in a structured fashion.
Architecture can provide detailed architecture definition for change, initiatives that are bounded
by the scope of a large scale program or portfolio.
And lastly, the implementation of change architecture can provide design governance to change initiatives.
Let's visualize the three architecture engagement areas, the activities and interrelationships.
Please bear in mind that the concept of iteration is used in all three areas.
For each architecture activity of an engagement area.
Topgolf provides you with information on how enterprise architecture can be used and generates value.
Again, we do not go into details and encourage you to read the handout of this course at your own pace.
Last not least, the talk of standard suggests which type of iteration can be used in which architecture
engagement area as depicted in this chart.
You apply architecture development iteration for supporting business strategy and architecture portfolio
management of the landscape.
Again and again you find further explanations in your handout.

--- Business Scenario Technique ---

Business requirements are vital for enterprise architecture.
Thankfully, the TOGAF standard comes with a technique to capture, analyze and to document the needs
of business.
The business scenario technique.
The method derives the characteristics of the architecture from the high level requirements of the business
to achieve the desired business outcomes.
Business scenario technique considers business value, outcomes and value streams and the required resources
to understand the requirements in any industry, for example, health care or transportation or oil.
Business scenario.
Technique can be applied to a very large general problem areas and very small focused problems areas.
And the technique may be used at various stages of developing an enterprise architecture.
But it's important, especially in the architecture vision phase, the business architecture, and the
requirements management phase.
When speaking of the business domain, there are many different terms used by the stakeholders for not
mixing up these concepts.
The business scenario technique defines business and architecture terms very precisely.
According to the enterprise Architecture framework, a business capability is an ability or capacity.
A business may possess or exchange to achieve a specific purpose or outcome.
Internet capability is an ability to achieve an outcome within a known environment through application
of human and or material resources in a value stream.
Outcome or changes, benefits, learning or other effects happening as a result of what the project
or organization offers or provides.
The value proposition is easy to remember.
Statement of the concrete results a customer will get from purchasing or using your enterprise products
or services.
And lastly, a value stream as a set of activities that the business operating in a specific industry
performs to deliver a valuable product or service for the market.
Okay, now we are ready to speak about the content of a business scenario.
The business scenario technique uses a uniform description to capture to capture the requirements of
the business.
For your exam, you should know these key elements.
We have a real business problems.
You have the desired outcomes of the proper execution.
You have the value streams which are enabled by capabilities you have.
Then the human and computing components, the so-called actors will provide the capabilities.
And you have the business and technology environment in which those problems occur.
Note that business scenarios are statements at a specific point in time, and you should update them
to reflect significant changes.
Now we know what a business scenario consists of.
But how do we know whether the scenario is of good quality?
A good business scenario fulfills five criteria, which you probably know from setting business and
private goals.
Smart.
As for specific, by defining what needs to be done in the business and for measurable through clear
metrics for success.
A for actionable by segmenting the problem and providing the basis for determining elements and plans
for the solution.
R for realistic, the problem can be solved within the bounds of the physical reality.
Time and cost constraints and t for time bound was a clear statement of when the solution opportunity
expires.
Please do not confuse the business scenario technique with other business related concepts.
The TOGAF standard clearly differentiates with regards to the use cases.
These are detailed descriptions of human to computer interactions being typically used in software development.
You then have the business models and business cases or business scenario plans.
A business scenario can be informed by a company's business model, as well as a smart business scenario
can inform a business model or a business case, or a business scenario plan.
You have then the spin technique, which stands for situation problem, implication and need payoff.
This is a sales technique that can be used to gather information for a business scenario.
On the other hand, the business scenario can provide relevant context information for a spin engagement.
And lastly, we have an engineering specifications like the IEEE.
These are detailed material specific and tied to science.
A business scenario elaborates, validates, and changes the premise for the upcoming architecture project.
The TOGAF standard proposes a general approach and recommends you to capture the key elements of a business
scenario in a successive iteration.
Each iteration requires the steps planning, information gathering, analysis, documentation, and
review.
Again, each iteration should improve one or more of the key elements of the scenario, and iterations
are repeated until your understanding is fit for purpose for deciding to move forward.
Please bear in mind that not examining all elements of your business scenario carries the risk of producing
an incomplete solution.
There are three main development phases for a business scenario.
Premise formulation phase, initial verification phase, and refinement phase, and each development
phase.
Each key element of the scenario is improved.
Each phase consists of the steps to plan, gather, analyze information and document results and review
the business scenario.
Key elements.
The refinement phase, decides about the fit for purpose, proceed to the next adme phase, or we find
a business scenario further in another iteration.
On top of that, the business scenario technique suggests you a structured documentation process.
It recommends you a six step process for documenting the key elements of your business scenario.
Lets us quickly go through these steps.
First, you identify, document and rank the problem driving your business scenario.
Second, you identify the business and technical environment and document the environment in scenario
models.
Third, you identify and document desired outcomes as smart results of handling the problems.
Roth.
You identify human actors and their place in the business model.
The fifth step, you identify computer actors and their place in the technology model.
And lastly, in step number six, you check the fitness for purpose of the business scenario and refine
scenario if necessary.

--- Gap Analysis ---

In toga gaps are accidental, deliberate or open shortfalls between the baseline architecture and the
target architecture.
Architecture gaps can be found in every architecture domain and the business domain, for example with
people, processes, tools, information facilities, also in the data domain with currency, location,
availability, creation, consumptions and so on.
You have the application domain, for example created application eliminated applications or impacted
applications, and you have the technology domain which are sources for gaps with again creation, elimination
and impacted technology components.
Note that ignored stakeholder concerns are the most critical sources of gaps.
TOGAF standard suggests you to use a metrics for comparing baseline and target architecture.
As you can see on the slide, an architecture building block can be included, added, or excluded from
the target architecture.
Eliminated or new is a gap which should be explained as eliminated or marked as to be addressed by reinstating,
developing or procuring the architecture.
Building block the ability.

--- Architecture Trade-off ---

Another important technique of TOGAF is the architecture trade off, also known as architecture trade
off method.
The trade off method is new for the TOGAF standard 10th edition.
The members of The Open Group have observed that facilitating trade offs is often more valuable than
architecture descriptions.
According to the Enterprise Architecture Framework, a trade off in general is a balance achieved between
two desirable but incompatible features.
A trade off is a compromise and losing one quality aspect or amount of something in return for gaining
another quality aspect or amount of something.
A trade off in enterprise architecture requires a compromise between one stakeholder's preferences,
as well as being different stakeholders preferences.
And is always also a question of point in time, objectives and context.
Note that good enterprise architecture addresses complex problems.
Complex problems, however, do not have a clear, unambiguous best answers and require trade off decisions.
Trade off decisions require a shared understanding of value, preference, priority and change scope.
There are some practical observations the open Group made with regards to stakeholders stakeholders
under-perform when a trade off stands beyond their spawn of control or interest, stakeholders underperform
when a trade off involves the preference of different stakeholders.
And stakeholders overemphasize their institutional role and preference of the organizational unit.
On the other hand, the aid practitioners facilitate trade off between stakeholders and across organizational
boundaries.
AEA practitioners find the best fit across competing preferences, priorities, and values.
They analyze the context and the objectives when facilitating trade off decisions.
AEA practitioners look for the hidden value when exploring an architecture alternative, and AEA practitioners
work with risk management.
Consider all transition states and leverage enterprise architecture tools.
The trade off method is sometimes referred to as architecture.
Alternative technique.
Use the decision technique to investigate different alternatives at any architecture level and any phase
in the architecture development method.
First select a sets of criteria fitting for different alternatives based on vision, principles, requirements
and other information you have.
Second, define possible alternatives based on the criteria and build understanding for each alternative.
And third, select one of the alternatives or combine features from more than one alternatives to create
the selected alternative.
Let's go through these three steps in more detail.
And the first step, you select a sets of criteria fitting for different alternatives.
The criteria are derived from different inputs to the architecture.
Note that viewpoints and views allow stakeholders to explore the alternatives, for instance dependencies,
risk and uncertainties.
Examples for criteria are solution delivery method, impact on business capabilities.
Time and cost for realizing adherence to architecture styles.
In step two, you define and investigate the alternatives based on the criteria to do so for each alternative.
You first define the overview criteria for the alternative.
You then second describe the architecture for the alternative.
Third, you estimate gaps between the baseline and the alternative as target architecture.
And fourth, understand the impacts and trade offs across the entire enterprise architecture landscape
of the alternative.
And the third and last step, you select one of the alternatives.
Therefore, you understand the weaknesses and strengths of each alternative.
You compare the alternatives based on a defined criteria.
You then select the most suitable alternative or combine future features of the alternatives you assemble.
Other alternatives.
And you resolve.
And in the fifth step, impacts across the enterprise architecture landscape.
And lastly, this is very important.
You conduct a formal stakeholder review for your selected alternative.

--- Migration Planning Techniques ---

There are a couple of more techniques that Hogarth Standard offers you for progressing in an ADM cycle.
Let's start with the implementation factor catalog and migration planning technique for phase F.
This matrix, you document the factors and descriptions as well as their impact on the implementation
and migration.
You have a list of architecture relevant factors to be considered, for example risks, assumptions,
issues and dependency.
This is the Y in this in this factor catalog.
You have then the details to each implementation factor the what and you have.
Lastly the actions or constraints to consider when formulating the implementation and migration plan.
So the so what question which you try to answer.
Another technique is the consolidated gaps, solutions and dependency matrix, sometimes abbreviated
as ZG.
SD matrix use the matrix in the ADM phase.
E and F to coop gaps and to assess potential solutions and dependencies.
As you can see in the slide, the technique captures the architecture domain gaps, gaps, closing solutions
as well as dependencies.
So we have the architecture domain business application information.
Then you have the gaps the shortfall between baseline and target architecture.
You have the approach to close one or more architecture gaps.
And lastly you have the constraints to be considered when creating projects or planning migration.
The metrics can be used as a planning tool when creating work packages and phases E and F.
Let's continue our journey in the world of migration planning techniques with the architecture definition.
Increments table.
The table outlines the status of the enterprise architecture at specific points in time.
Main drivers are the projects that provide deliverables for specific transition architectures.
The table allows you, as an enterprise architect to plan a series of transition architectures.
Another technique for migration planning is the transition architecture state evolution table.
The table outlines the status of the enterprise architecture at specified points in time.
For each architecture, subdomain and enterprise service, you list the solution building blocks of
the planned transition architectures.
You have the architecture domain, you have the service, you have the transition architecture, and
you have the proposed transformation with solution building blocks.
Again, this technique is useful in phase E and F of the architecture development method.
The table also allows you to show the proposed architecture states at various levels.
Finally, the TOGAF standard proposes the business Value assessment.
The project portfolio view differentiates between a value index and a risk index.
The value index dimension includes criteria such as compliance to principles, financial contribution,
strategic alignment, and competitive position.
Turn.
The risk index dimension includes criteria such as technology, size and complexity, organizational
capacity, and impact of failure.
Each project is listed according to its value and risk.

--- Risk management ---

Transforming an enterprise takes place in an environment of uncertainty.
Your main goal is to optimize business benefits while reducing business losses.
Therefore, you need to identify, understand and mitigate risks.
The Tokayev standard provides you with a vocabulary for risk management.
So let's go through some important terms for Tokayev.
Risk is an effect of uncertainty on objectives, with uncertainty as any deviation from what is expected
in the positive and negative way.
You have risk triggers, which may be inside or outside the scope of the transformation project.
We have the risk management with identifying and assessing the likelihood and magnitude of potential
positive or negative events and strategic, tactical and operational level.
Some other important concepts for risk management is the initial level of risk that is in risk categorization
prior to determining and implementing mitigation.
And second, you have the residual level of risk, which is a risk category after the implementation
of mitigation.
Let's now look on the classification of risks.
The TOGAF standard uses a risk concept from the Sabsa Institute.
First, there is a differentiation between business risk and cyber risk as depicted on the left picture
on this slide.
Second, there is a balanced view with risk either being a threat or an opportunity for your enterprise.
Torgoff uses a second concept from the Sabsa Institute, the Sabsa Business Attribute model.
The model expresses security concerns and measures risk mitigation efficacy in terms of risks.
The model focuses on five aspects.
First, asset protection, which is protection of information assets from loss or unintended disclosure,
and resources from unauthorized and unintended use.
Then you have the risk assessment, which measure measures risk regarding the likelihood and impact
and accepting, mitigating or transferring it according to the organisation's risk appetite.
Third more element is the access control, which stands for identification and authentication of the
asset user.
First we have to audit.
This is fulfillment of the requirements by the operational environment.
And the fifth element of the of the subsub business attribute model is availability as an ability to
function without service, interruption or depletion despite abnormal or malicious events.
Part of risk management is risk assessment.
The TOGAF standard proposes you a method for classifying.
Transformation risks with respect to effect and frequency.
The effect is on the organization that can be catastrophic.
Critical.
Marginal.
Negligible.
The frequency during the transformation can be frequent, likely occasional, seldom, or unlikely.
The method.
Initial risk assessment combines effect and frequency using a heuristically based classification.
As you can see in the table, there is extremely high risk, high risk, moderate risk, and low risk.
For an extremely high risk, the transformation will most likely fail with severe consequences for high
risk.
There is failure of parts for the transformation, resulting in goals not being achieved.
With low risk.
There are certain goals of the transformation will be not fully successful, and with moderate risk
there are failure of parts of the transformation threatening the success of goals.

--- The Open Group TOGAF Library ---

The Open Group offers you additional techniques in the Autograph library.
The additional material supports the practical application of the Enterprise Architecture framework.
The Autograph Library is part of the graph documentation set with potentially useful resources.
The TOGAF library contains guidelines, templates, patterns, and reference material to accelerate
your creation of new enterprise architectures.
The library supports the reference library and the architectural repository, and is maintained under
the governance of the open Group Architecture Forum.
The Hogarth Library is categorized based on capabilities and features ranging from fundamental content
to practical application.
For your Hogarth Enterprise Architecture Part two exam.
The content of the Hogarth Library is not necessary, however, in our eyes, its worth to open the
website and browse through the additional material.

--- Communicating with Stakeholders ---

Enterprise architecture is communicating with stakeholders.
In the following we focus on stakeholder and interactions.
But first we have to repeat one core concept.
The TOGAF standard differs between architecture and implementation.
Project.
The architecture project develops and implements the enterprise architectures.
It defines the target architectures and necessary changes, and the architecture project focuses on
enterprise priorities and demonstrates how the project is addressing the priority.
In turn, the implementation project realized the approved changes required to reach the target architecture.
It delivers value a few quarters after the project is closed, and the implementation project is monitored
and controlled through the architecture project within phase G.
Implementation.
Governance.
In enterprise architecture, stakeholders are key.
Let's define the terms stakeholder following this TOGAF standard.
A stakeholder is an individual a team, an organization or a class thereof having an interest in a system.
A stakeholder has approval rights in the target architecture being explored by the architecture project,
and the stakeholder has decision rights to the suitability of the implementation.
Note that different stakeholders have different concerns about the enterprise architecture.
As a matter of fact, different stakeholders require different communication.
The TOGAF standard provides a list of stakeholder classes as a starting point.
As you can see, different stakeholder types have different concerns.
For instance, implementers are interested in developing, integrating and deploying solutions.
In contrast, customers consume product and services.
But what is a concern?
Torgoff defines the terms as an interest of stakeholders in a system which is part of, or even the
entire enterprise.
A concern represents a consistent set of subjects derived from the strategy that captured the stakeholders
interest.
A concern acts to consolidate requirements, and the concern is often consistent from one architecture
project to another, with a cluster from 6 to 9 areas.
Important to note that essential concerns represent the questions that a capability is expected to answer.
Like stakeholders, the TOGAF standard provides a list of concerned classes.
The spectrum ranges from agility to costs.
Note the generic character of the concerned classes, given their help at the beginning of your enterprise
architecture endeavor.
You find more details in the appendix section of the series guide.
A Practitioner's Approach to Developing the Enterprise Architecture for linking Data.gov ADM.
Bringing together stakeholders and concerns, you can create a stakeholder map.
The table focuses on the enterprise priorities.
The stakeholders are listed as rose the concerns as columns.
In addition, for each stakeholder, a concern is set in a relationship to power and interest.
This facilitates trade off decisions.
Note that a trade off is performed within a concern and between different concerns.
Also, bear in mind that missing requirements with the concern can either be a gap in information gathering,
or a demonstration that stakeholders are saying, no, this doesn't matter.
When it comes to stakeholder communication.
Another important terme is architecture view, often abbreviated view.
A view is what you see of a system, the enterprise or parts of it.
It represents the landscape and addresses a set of stakeholders concerns about the architecture.
A view describes how the architecture addresses the concerns or demonstrate how the associated requirements
are met, and a view allows stakeholders to put things in the context and have confidence about the
target architecture, the change and the trade off.
The big brother of a view is the architecture viewpoint.
A viewpoint represent your stance.
That is what where you are looking from on the system.
A viewpoint should identify the concern, the stakeholders, how the view should be constructed and
the information required.
A viewpoint allows specialized communication to stakeholders that explicitly address a concern, and
a viewpoint is maintained in a library of viewpoints that can be reused.
Note that every view has a viewpoint, at least implicitly.
Again, the TOGAF Series Guide helps you merging stakeholder classes and typical concerns classes with
the help of a matrix.
For each intersection, you can create a viewpoint identifying the necessary information and communication
required to address the concern.

--- Architecture Views ---

Architecture views describe the current and future enterprise architecture to stakeholders.
Choosing the best view is a key decision for enterprise architects.
Good views fulfill several purposes.
They show the trade offs made.
They consider practicality and fitness for purpose.
Good views ensure the completeness of the architecture by addressing all stakeholders concerns.
Good views ensure the integrity of the architecture by connecting all the various views and good views.
Reconcile the conflicting concerns of different stakeholders.
There are some general recommendations to govt gives you when developing and using architecture views.
First, the development of architecture views is an iterative process for baseline architecture and
the target architecture.
Second, the typical progression from business to technology and high level overview to low level detail,
continually referring to the stakeholders concerns and requirements.
Third, resulting views of baseline and target architecture provide the context for the gap analysis
at the end of the architecture development methods phase B, C, and D, and lastly, the TOGAF standard
encourage but does not mandate the use of the ISO, IEC, IEEE for the 2010 standard for creating views.
However, architecture views do not fall from the sky.
Instead, views are created based on and on the predefined viewpoints stored in the viewpoint library.
TOGAF suggests a three step process for generating a view for the enterprise architecture for developing
a view.
First, refer to an existing library of architecture viewpoints.
Then select the appropriate architecture viewpoints based on the stakeholders and their concerns that
need to be covered by the views.
And third, generate views of the system by using the selected architecture viewpoints as templates.
In case no appropriate viewpoint is predefined, first, generate a new viewpoint covering the open
need, or second, create an ad hoc view for and later.
Consider the creation of a generalized form of the implicit architecture viewpoint.
Using predefined viewpoints from the viewpoint library has several benefits for enterprise architects
and stakeholders.
Let us briefly go through the advantages.
Viewpoints provide high comprehensibility for stakeholders since the viewpoints are already familiar.
Viewpoints also create confidence in the views validity.
Since the viewpoints have a known track record and viewpoints reduce work for the architecture since
views can be created faster.

--- Architecture Repository ---

The Enterprise Architecture Repository contains all information you have on the current and future enterprise
architecture, as well as its management.
As a practitioner, you are directly concerned with the architecture repositories content.
Take a closer look on the graphic on this slide showing all components of the architecture repository.
Generally a well-run repository minimizes the architecture information gathered and maintained while
preserving integrity.
Often the enterprise architecture repository components are implemented by a modeling and analytics
tool or file repository and document management system.
And lastly, the enterprise architecture teams should have information visualization skills addressing
stakeholders concerns with appropriate viewpoints.
The Enterprise Architecture repository stores the work products used for different architecture capabilities.
In the left column of this table you see different work products generating when cycling through the
architecture development method, the ADM.
The other columns show the work products are used in the architecture capabilities.
We do not want to go into details here.
Just stop the video and go through the tables at your own pace.
Let's go into the details of the architecture repository, starting with the architecture landscape.
This element of the repository holds architectural views of the enterprise at specific points in time.
Due to the volume and needs, the landscape is divided into three levels of granularity.
First, the strategic architectures.
These show the long terme summary of the enterprise, provide a change framework and allow for direction
setting at top level.
Second segment architectures.
Segment architectures provide operating models for areas within the enterprise, and can be used at
program and portfolio level to organize and align change activity.
And third, we have the capability architectures.
They show how the enterprise can support a unit of capability used to provide an overview of current
and target capabilities and capability increments, and allow for work and package projects to be grouped
within a portfolio and programs.
Another element of the architectural repository is the reference library.
The library keeps reference materials that should be used to develop architectures.
It contains generic and organization specific reference architectures and reference models.
Viewpoint, library and templates.
The reference library may be obtained from standard bodies, product and service vendors, industry
communities or firms, enterprise best practices and standard templates, and the library segregates
different classes of reference materials using the architecture continuum.
You probably remember the enterprise architecture continuum, also known as Architecture Continuum.
You can use this concept as a method for classifying the reference library, ranging from foundation
architecture to organization specific architecture.
Thereby, the needs and requirements are addressed in a decreasing abstraction from left to right.
There are more reusable architecture.
Elements can be found towards the left of the range, and the existing material is appropriate to different
levels and partitions of the enterprise architecture landscape.
This brings us to another element of the architecture repository, the Standards Library.
This type of library holds all specification to which enterprise architectures must confirm according
to the repository.
Standards fall into three classes.
You have legal and regulatory obligations.
These are mandated by law and mandatory for your enterprise.
You have industry standards.
Industry standards are established by industry bodies selected for adoption and monitored by the enterprise,
and they offer potential for interoperating and sharing across enterprises.
And you have the last class of standards.
These are organizational standards.
These are sets within the organization based on business aspiration.
And they require processes to allow for the exemption and evolution.
The standards library provides a basis for architecture governance, since standards are stated in a
clear and unambiguous manner so that compliance can be objectively assessed and standards are easily
accessible to projects so that the obligations of the projects can be understood and planned for.
The TOGAF standard suggests to categorize standards according to the TOGAF enterprise meta model.
This implies that standards refer to the entities of the enterprise meta model, for example business
services.
This also implies that standards may relate to approved building blocks, or specify appropriate use
of the building blocks.
Note that standards are classified in line with the architecture domains.
At the top level, you have the business standards like shared capabilities, actors roles, and so
on.
You have data standards, for example, coding value structures, ownership.
You have application standards with functions, communication access, presentation of your applications.
And you have the technology standards with hardware, software and development.
Furthermore, the Tokayev standard recommends to manage standards through a dedicated life cycle process.
The framework differentiates between the following states.
You have a proposed standard.
A proposed standard is identified but not been evaluated for adoption.
Then you have the provisional standard.
This trial standard is identified, but hasn't been tried and tested to a level where its value is fully
understood.
It's adopted under specific pilot conditions.
Then you have the standard, which is an active standard as a mainstream solution, being generally
used as a first choice.
We have the phasing out standard, also known as a deprecated standard.
This standard is at the end of its useful life cycle.
While discouraging the deployment of new instances.
And lastly, we have the retired standard.
This obsolete standard is no longer accepted as valid.
Note that standards are periodically reviewed, with any changes also considering their impact in the
organization.
So let's come to the governance repository.
Another element of the architecture repository.
The governance repository keeps shared information relating to the governance of the implementation
projects.
The element is divided into six sub elements.
First the decision log.
This is a log of all architecture significant decisions.
Then second you have the compliance assessments.
This is a log of all reviews of the project compliance.
To define standards we have the capability assessments element.
This is a log of all reviews of business IT or architecture capability.
In governance repository, you have also a calendar which which is a schedule of in-flight projects
and formula reviews to be held.
We have to project portfolio.
This element is a summary about all in-flight projects that fall under the architecture governance,
including name, description, scope and architectural roles.
And lastly, in the governance repository you have the performance measurement.
This is a log of all metrics relating to the project governance and any other performance.
Requirements play a big role in the management of enterprise architectures.
Not surprisingly, the Architecture Requirements repository is also part of the architecture repository.
As discussed in the ADM phase requirements Management architecture, requirements are gathered at every
stage of the ADM cycle and need to be approved.
And architecture requirements are archived for audit purpose once met by the solution building blocks
of the solution landscape.
Note that the repository is managed through the ADM requirements management phase, ensuring the integrity
of all requirements as well as their availability for access by all ADM phases.
Due to the volume and needs.
The requirements repository is divided into three levels of granularity.
Again, you have the strategic architecture requirements.
These show a long terme summary of the requirements for the enterprise and allow for direction setting
at top level.
We have second the segment architecture requirements.
These type of requirements provide operating model requirements for areas within an enterprise, and
can be used at program and portfolio level to organize and align change activity.
And third, you have the capability architecture requirements.
These types of requirements identify the requirements for a unit of capability as well as for work packages
and projects.
Counterpart of the architecture landscape is the resolution landscape.
This element of the architecture repository holds the specified, developed and deployed solution building
blocks, also known as SBS.
Contain solution.
Building blocks are products or services which make be categorized according to the enterprise continuum
and as or strategic segment and capability.
The SBS may include tools, systems, services and information describing the actual solutions and their
operations, and the SBS include the information and data content produced by the defined solutions.
The architectural repository doesn't exist in a vacuum.
There are other relevant data stores spread across the organization.
The TOGAF standard calls them Enterprise Repository.
The enterprise repository holds information concerning the enterprise architecture and associated specifications
and artifacts.
Note that different enterprise repositories inside and outside the organization support your architecture
work.
Examples for enterprise repositories are.
Development repositories specify operating environments, instructions, and configuration management
repositories.
This concludes our expedition in and around the Enterprise Architecture repository.
You are now able to structure the content on your enterprise architecture and its management.

--- Architecture Building Blocks ---

The Tokyo Standard differentiates between the planned architecture and an implemented solution.
Parts of the architecture are architecture building blocks, abbreviated as ABS, ABS, Captcha architecture.
Requirements for the business for the data, the application and technology.
ABS direct and guide the development of the solution.
Building blocks.
The SBS ABS are defined or selected as a result of the application of the architecture development method.
The ADM and architecture building blocks relate to the architecture continuum of the enterprise continuum.
An architecture building block has a specific characteristic.
It possesses a fundamental functionality and attributes it depends on or serves other architecture,
building blocks with required functionality, and named user interfaces.
The architecture building block supplies a chosen set of interfaces.
It maps to business and organizational entities and policies, and lastly it interoperates with other
architecture building blocks.

--- Enterprise Metamodel ---

The architecture development method of the TOGAF standard supports the life cycle of enterprise architectures.
An essential task when establishing the enterprise architecture capability in the ADM preliminary phase
is to define the content framework, which is a categorization framework, structuring the architecture
descriptions the work products and models, and is influenced by the chosen architecture framework and
software tools.
Second step here is the enterprise meta model, which is a formal model with types of entities and relationships
within the enterprise.
It needs to be captured, stored, and analyzed to create architecture descriptions.
And you have the third part which is architecture artifacts.
These are work products describing an aspect of the architecture.
The Enterprise Metamodel includes all relevant entities within the enterprise, as well as the relationships
between these entities.
The model defines what element of your architecture are important for your stakeholders and their concerns.
In this vein, the Enterprise Metamodel works as an architecture starter set of the types of things
to investigate and to cover in models.
The Enterprise Metamodel serves as a completeness check for in any architecture, modeling language
or meta model you use, and the meta model helps you for consistency, completeness, and traceability.
On this slide, you see the TOGAF enterprise Metamodel as an example for the enterprise metamodel.
We are going to talk about this good practice model later on in this course.
The Tokayev standard encourages you to develop an enterprise meta model.
There are a couple of characteristics the meta model adheres to.
According to the Tokayev standard, a high quality meta model is important for establishing establishing
the capability, its types of entity, and their relationships are specified to the individual enterprise,
so each enterprise meta model is unique.
Hogarth does not constrain the selection of artefacts or modelling notation, you are free to choose.
And the enterprise meta model can be modeled in a variety of languages, for example Archimate.
Business process modeling and notation, the Unified Modeling Language flowchart, or the entity relationship
diagram.
The TOGAF standard lists a couple of enterprise modeling methods in the appendix section of its series
guide.
We do not go into details in this course, however, we recommend you to quickly scan the other approaches
and their recommended use cases.
As the starting point for your enterprise architecture project, Topgolf offers you an out of the box
enterprise meta model.
Use this model in the preliminary phase as a basis for your organization specific meta model.
The Topgolf Enterprise meta model captures the entities and relationships that are likely to be encountered
in the majority of enterprise architecture projects.
It contains elements of business data, application, and technology architecture.
The Togolese Enterprise Metamodel provides a context for the artifacts specified in the phases of the
architecture development method.
It is used as the basis for developing an organization specific metamodel when establishing the enterprise
Architecture capability.
It allows you to add, additional or omit suggested entities and relationships to your metamodel.
It allows also architectural concepts to be captured, stored, filtered, queried, and represented
in a way that supports consistency, completeness, and traceability.
And the talk of enterprise meta model may use the categorization of the content framework as an underlying
structure.

--- Architecture Content Framework ---

Let us now focus on the second concept for architecture lifecycle management.
The content framework.
Architects executing the ADM will produce a number of outputs as a result of the efforts such as process
flows, architecture requirements, project plans or project compliance assessments.
The content framework provides an underlying structure for the ADM that defines inputs and outputs in
more detail, and puts each deliverable into the context of the holistic architecture view of the enterprise.
The content framework should therefore be used as a companion to the ADM.
The ADM describes what needs to be done to create an architecture, and the content framework describes
what the architecture should look like once it's done.
A content framework offers many benefits.
The Torgoff Content framework is intended to provide a detailed model of architectural work products.
It drives consistency in the outputs created when following the EDM, and provides a comprehensive checklist
of architecture output that could be created.
The content framework reduces the risk of gaps within the final architecture deliverables set, and
helps an enterprise to standardize architecture concepts, standardize terms and deliverables.
The Content Framework supports the use of the Toga framework as a standalone framework for architecture.
However, other content frameworks do exist.
For example, within the Archimate specification you can use an external framework instead of the provided
content framework.

--- Enterprise Architecture Capability ---

Effective enterprise architecture requires you to establish and evolve an enterprise architecture capability,
the EA capability.
On this slide, you can see what an EA capability consists of.
For the TOGAF standard, an enterprise architecture capability is a business capability for architecture
with organization, roles, skills, responsibility, and processes.
It's a management concept that facilitates planning.
It's established to support several purposes.
As you know, the architecture to support strategy, the architecture to support portfolio, architecture
to support projects, and the architecture to support solution delivery.
Let's take a closer look on the purposes of an EA capability.
Enterprise architecture can support your enterprise in many ways.
In any case, the main goal is to develop, use and sustain the architecture to govern change.
As you can see on the slide, there are four purpose capabilities of architecture work, ranging ranging
from strategy to solution delivery.
Let's go through them starting with the most left purpose with architecture to support strategy, you
and your team team focus on change, synergies, governance for multiple programs and portfolios.
Therefore, you provide target architectures and roadmaps.
With architecture to support portfolio portfolio, you concentrate on alignment, synergies.
Governance for a single portfolio of projects.
In doing so, you support cross-functional and during many project phases.
As the name suggests, with architecture support to projects, UIs are on integration for a single project.
You do this by supporting the delivery.
Lastly, with architecture to support solution delivery, you and your EAM team center on change governance
for a single project or a significant part.
This time your support solution you support solution deployment.
The purpose capabilities play an important role for the TOGAF standard.
Chances are high that your exam will touch on them.
Crazy but true.
You can apply the TOGAF standard to optimize your enterprise architecture capability, your EA capability,
and the series guide.
A Practitioner's Approach to Developing Enterprise Architecture.
Following the ADM, TOGAF gives you a step by step instruction.
Again, we do not go into details of this example found in the appendix section of the guide.
However, the handout of this course provides you with the full information.

--- Architecture Governance ---

Architecture.
Governance governs the creation, development and maintenance of enterprise architectures.
The TOGAF Enterprise Architecture Practitioner curriculum only touches briefly on this topic, given
that governance was closely examined in the foundation part.
Architecture.
Governance covers two distinct aspects.
First, the development of the target architecture.
That means supporting the organization's leadership, directing and controlling change.
Second, all the change within the scope of the architecture, meaning developing a good target that
provides an organization's best achievable course forward.
An architecture project directs and controls the development of the target architecture with the request
for architecture work and the statement of architecture work.
The implementation project in turn directs and controls the change with the architecture, contract
and architecture requirements.
Specification.
Who has the power in an enterprise architecture project.
The TOGAF standard differentiates between three roles stakeholders EA practitioner and implementer.
As an IA practitioner, your focus is on scope, concerns, preferences, objectives and priorities.
For this, you apply governance tests.
As an implementer, you center on value based outcomes and value realization using best practice governance
and last at any time.
Stakeholders directs and controls the work of IA practitioner and implementer.

--- Architecture Compliance ---

An essential aspect of architecture governance is architecture compliance.
The TOGAF Stanger standard distinguishes between architecture function as well as an enterprise and
IT governance function.
The architecture function prepares the project architectures illustrating how the enterprise architecture
impacts on major projects.
The architecture function may stipulate the participation in the technology selection process and in
external service provision and product purchases, in addition to architecture definition and standard
selection.
In turn, the enterprise and IT governance function defines a formal architecture compliance review
process for reviewing the compliance of projects to the enterprise architecture.
But what does architecture compliance mean?
The standard differentiates between six different decrees and actual solution implementation conforms
to the specified enterprise architecture.
Let's go through the levels of architecture conformance one by one.
First, irrelevant.
That means that implementation has no features in common with the architecture specification.
We have.
Second consistent.
That means that implementation has some features in common with the architecture specification and are
implemented in accordance.
However, some features in the architecture specification are not implemented, and the implementation
has other features that are not covered by the specification.
Compliant means that some features in the architecture specification are not implemented.
However, all features implemented are covered by the specification and are in accordance.
We have conformant.
That means all features in the architecture specification are implemented in accordance, but some more
features are implemented that are not in accordance with it.
Then we have fully confirmed there is a full correspondence between architecture, specification and
implementation.
All specified features are implemented in accordance with the specification, and there are no features
implemented that are not covered by the specification.
And six.
And lastly, we have Non-conformant.
That means any of the above in which some features in the architecture specifications are implemented
not in accordance with the specification.
Please note that the three little words in accordance with can have different meanings regarding the
architecture specification.
The implemented feature first supports the stated strategy and future directions, or second, adheres
to the standard or third provides the stated functionality or force adheres to the stated principles.
Architecture.
Compliance is ensured by an architecture compliance review, a process resulting in an architecture
compliance assessment.
The review is a scrutiny of a specific project against architectural criteria, spirit and objectives.
The review is also a process forming the core of an enterprise architecture compliance strategy.
When you conduct an architecture compliance review, you should always have a goal in mind.
The standard makes several propositions.
Why a compliance review makes sense.
For instance, catching errors in the project architecture early to reduce cost and risks of changes.
Ensuring the application of best practices to architecture work is also a goal, or providing an overview
of the compliance of an architecture to the enterprise standards.
Identifying where the standards themselves may require.
Modification is also a goal of architecture compliance review.
Or identifying application services that can be provided as enterprise infrastructure.
And another goal is documenting strategies for collaboration, resource sharing and other synergies.
There are even more goals of a compliance review.
Torgoff suggests taking advantage of advances in technology, for instance, or identifying key key
criteria for procurement activities.
Communicating to management the status of business and technical technical readiness.
Or identifying and communicating significant architectural gaps to product and service providers.
Finally, there may be also political oriented motivations leading to an architecture compliance review.
For instance, deciding between architectural alternatives from a business perspective or assisting
in decision making as a measurable deliverable.
Enabling interactions of the implementation projects and the architecture function may also be an goal
of architecture compliance review or demonstrating rapid and positive support to the enterprise business
community.
Lastly, highlighting areas to be addressed for realignment or integration into the architectures may
be an architecture compliance review goal.
The compliance review takes place at specific milestones in the Architecture and Implementation project's
life cycle.
During architecture development, you review the architecture focusing on ADM compliance.
This requires that business requirements and the enterprise architecture are reasonably firm.
During project implementation, however, you review the realization of the architecture, focusing
on architecture compliance.
The assessment takes place at specific checkpoints within the project.
Execution.
An architecture compliance review is mandated as part of the corporate architecture governance governance
policies, depending on the type of project.
Your role as an enterprise architect is different.
In a smaller scale project, the project architecture or leaders pose themselves a series of questions.
They also use a checklist compiling the answers in a project report.
In an application level project, the Enterprise Architecture teams or the EA team organizes, leads
and contacts to review the selected business domain.
Experts are involved and the answers are documented in a report.
Lastly, in a large scale architecture project, the Lead Enterprise Architect or the Architecture Board
coordinates the review.
Several business and technical domain experts are involved.
Again, the answers are compiled into a report.
The TOGAF standard supports you with the resources for a structured compliance review.
Take a look on the target architecture list on the left here.
Ensuring architecture governance.
Note that the EA practitioner assesses the target architecture and the stakeholders approve it and other
negative response.
The practitioner reworks the target architecture or the target architecture project is cancelled.
In Turin.
The implementation and other change checklists ensures governance during the implementation phase.
During the project execution, the EEA practitioner acts as an auditor for the compliance assessment
and as an architect with recommendations.
Recommendation is based on impact assessment and first compliance, or provide temporary relief or change
the target architecture.
You find both checklists in the series guide A Practitioner's Approach to Developing Enterprise Architecture
following the ADM.
At the end of an architecture compliance review stands the assessment.
A useful resource for this report is the Enterprise Architecture Repository.
A well-run architectural repository supports compliance.
It contains Gaps architecture requirements, specifications, controls, and necessary views to perform
effective compliance assessment.
It also contains the equivalent of an architecture contract for every implementation project.
It is focused on demonstrating value realization compliance reviews, indicating the implementation
will fail to realize expected value are key inputs to future architecture development.
When investigating the architecture development method, the ADM, you see that Architecture Compliance
Assessment report is compiled in phase G and in phase H.
PSG considers the scope of the implementation project and the work packages filling the gaps.
It also confirms whether the architecture requirements specification have been followed.
In turn, phase H assesses realized value using the linkage between specified constraints and stakeholders
requirements.

--- Architecture Contracts ---

Generally, an architecture contract is an agreement between development partners and sponsors on the
deliverables, quality and fitness for purpose of an architecture.
Architecture contracts are a valuable means for enterprise architecture.
Governance.
With the contract project, implementers receive context gap architecture specification and control
for the different roles.
An architecture contract has different meanings for the stakeholders of the target architecture.
The contract identifies the responsibility of the implementation team.
For implementers.
The most critical information items in the contract are.
Scope.
Context and conformance.
For the IA practitioner.
The contract highlights what is prohibited and ensures specification compliance.
The link of a specification to a requirement allows the design and implementation to be assessed.
Architecture.
Contracts may occur at various stages of of the architecture development method.
Phase A with a statement of architectural work.
Phase B, C and D with the architecture, design and Development contract.
Phase F and H with the business stakeholders.
Architecture, contract and G with the standard architecture contracts for implementation.
Governance.
Let's dive deeper and speak about the purpose and the content of the three specific types of architecture
contracts.
One famous type of architecture contract is the statement of architectural work.
The statement represents an architectural contract between the architecture, organization and the sponsor
of the enterprise architecture, and is created as a deliverable of phase A.
The statement of architectural work defines the scope and the approach being used for an architecture
development cycle.
It may form the basis for a contractual agreement between the supplier and the consumers of architecture
services.
The statement of architectural work contains the title the approvals, the change of scope procedures.
It contains also architectural project requests, background descriptions, scope, plan and schedule,
as well as acceptance criteria and procedures, roles, responsibilities, responsibilities and deliverables.
And lastly, it contains an overview of the architecture vision.
A second type of architecture contract is the architecture design and development contract.
This type of contract is a statement of intent on designing and developing parts, or the entire enterprise
architecture from partners.
It defines the the deliverables, the quality and the fitness for purpose of the developed architecture
and the collaboration process of the partners, and it is defined as the appropriate stage of the ADM
depending on the contracted work.
What does the architecture, design and development Contract contains?
It contains the introduction, the background and the nature of the agreement, as well as the architecture
scope, the target architecture measures, and the delivery and business metrics.
It also describes the architecture and strategic principles and conformance requirements, as well as
the architecture, development and management processes, and work plan and time windows.
Finally there is the business stakeholders architecture contract.
The contract is drawn up between the architecture function and the business stakeholders, who will
subsequently be building and deploying the architecture business solutions.
It is created at the end of phase F with agreed implementation and migration plan, but is also used
to manage changes to the enterprise architecture in phase H.
The business stakeholders.
Architecture contract contains the introduction, the background and the nature of the agreement, the
scope, the strategic and conformance requirements, as well as the service level agreements.
It also has or describes the architecture deliverables, the business metrics as well as time, windows
and the architecture adopters.

--- Security Architecture ---

Move is the talk of standard.
10th edition is the focus on enterprise security.
There is a serious guide called Integrating Risk and Security with TOGAF Enterprise Architecture that
comes along with the current version of the standard.
According to the AEA framework, a security architecture is both a driver and an enabler of secure,
safe, resilient, reliable, and risk managed behavior.
Enterprise security architecture represents the structure of organizational, conceptual, logical,
and physical components that interact to achieve and maintain a state of managed risk and information
security.
Enterprise Security Architecture builds on information available in the enterprise architecture and
produces information that influences the enterprise architecture.
Enterprise security architecture is also business driven while supporting the integration of information
security management and enterprise risk management.
It considers business system information, project privacy, compliance and organizational change risk
not only on architecture project risk as the standard.
For The Open Group, enterprise Architecture and Enterprise security architecture should be closely
integrated.
As you can see on the picture, both disciplines are linked through the security additions to the architecture
development method.
Moreover, the TOGAF standard recommends that security architects and enterprise architects speak the
same language.
As mentioned, information security management and enterprise risk management are core concepts of the
enterprise security architecture.
Let's see how security additions bring security to the architecture development method, the ADM.
As you can see on the slide, each ADM phase has its individual security additions.
In a couple more minutes, we are going to revisit the ADM phases and speak about each addition in detail.
One security edition of the enterprise Security architecture is this is the Security Service, a concept
that bundles several security controls.
A security service is expressed through an architecture building block, an AB capturing architecture,
requirements that guide the development of solution building blocks the SBS.
The Security Service captures security requirements and guides the development of subservices and components
for the business data, application and technology architecture domain.
The Security Service is registered and described and the Security Service Catalog offering a common
terminology and reference framework for security management.
Examples for security services is identity and access management, continuity management, security
intelligence, digital forensics, audit, network monitoring, compliance management, and training
and awareness programs.
Security architecture is not limited to one architecture domain.
In contrast, security is a cross-cutting concern, cutting through all of four of the four architecture
domains business, data, application, and technology.
As depicted on this slide, the enterprise security architecture is pervasive through the role enterprise
architecture.
It is partly developed in an integrated fashion with the enterprise architecture, and it impacts,
informs and interacts with the business data, application and technology architecture as a subset of
the enterprise architecture.

--- ADM Phase A: Risk & Security ---

Let's speak about enterprise security architecture in phase A of the architecture development method.
The architecture.
Vision carries out security specific architecture design.
There are two main tasks.
First, satisfy the security stakeholders that the target architecture does not represent any unknown
or any unacceptable risk and aligns with the corporate policies, standards and principles.
Second, satisfy the business stakeholders that the security architecture supports the target architecture
and realizing business opportunities and benefits and risk balancing.
A security blueprint captures stakeholders security concerns and requirements and will be detailed in
later phases of the architecture development method.
Viewpoints and business cases built on security principles, drivers, key risks and risk appetite and
are an integral part of the overall architecture.
Development phase A deliverables.

--- ADM Phase B-D: Risk & Security ---

Let's speak about enterprise security architecture in phase B of the ADM.
Security for business architecture comprises business level trust risk and controls independent from
it and the following.
We shortly go through main elements of business architecture.
Security first security policy architecture, also known as Security Policy Framework.
This contains a set of security policies, security policies that express the security strategy.
It also assigns ownership and accountability for security and risk assessment and security policy.
Architecture addresses the linkage and hierarchy of operational risk management with security aspects.
In turn, the security domain model groups the assets with the same security level that fall under the
jurisdiction of one security policy.
The model defines responsibility areas where responsibility is exchanged with external partners.
It is used to distinguish between areas of different security or trust levels.
The trust framework describes trust relationships between entities in the architecture domains and their
bases.
The trust framework also uses technology to convey trust that exists in the real world, for example
via digital certificates.
Then we have the risk assessment.
In the business security architecture, risk assessment determines the risk that are relevant to an
asset or objective regarding threats, the likelihood of materializing, and impact.
The risk assessment applies.
Qualitative and quantitative risk assessment.
Then we have the business risk model or the also known as risk register.
This results from a risk assessment and details.
The risk strategy of the enterprise determines the cost of asset loss and impact, impact and failure
cases.
The applicable law and regulations.
Register contains the laws and regulations that apply within the scope of the Architecture project.
It updates following legal and regulatory changes relevant for the system or its data.
Lastly, the applicable Control Framework register contains the set of control frameworks that best
satisfy the architecture, project requirements and risks.
For instance, Cobit or the ISO, IEC, IEEE 20,001.
It selects frameworks based on certifications, information security and audits.
When it comes to phase C, security comprises functional security services and the security classification.
Let's go quickly through the three elements of information systems architecture.
Security Service Catalog provides security specific functionality as part of the architecture.
It ensures a common terminology and reference framework for security management.
The Security Services Catalog contains conceptual definitions and implementation, as well as users
usage information of the security building blocks.
Realizing the security goals.
The security classification is expressed as a label attached to an asset.
It depends on the asset characteristics with regards to a classification scheme, and determines the
security requirements applying to the assets.
The data quality, however, starts with an overview on the data sets, including ownership and responsibility.
It comprises authorization of people or processes for data activity.
It measures data key attributes, for instance accuracy, relevance, timelessness, currency completeness,
consistency and availability.
That brings us to phase D and the technology security architecture for this domain architecture.
Security comprises views and deliverables.
The technology architecture security view or deliverable includes the technology for the provision and
regulation of system resources, for example, electric power, processing capacity, network bandwidth
and memory.
It explains which business risks are mitigated by what technology.

--- ADM Phase E-F: Risk & Security ---

When it comes to enterprise architecture.
Security phase I of the ADM comprises general measures and risk mitigation.
General measures ensure the stakeholders security and risk concerns are addressed.
The new measures include security and risk when determining the value of work packages.
They transform the security building blocks of previous ADM phases to solution building blocks.
The SBS general measures use the Security Service Catalogue to identify existing security services or
building blocks.
Risk Mitigation Plan implements the risk mitigation strategy.
It considers also risk appearing as a result of the new architecture.
In the Adme phase F enterprise security architecture and Globes.
General measures.
These measures include a risk assessment and a risk mitigation plan and the migration strategy.
They consider regression planning when migrating live environments and general measures run a security
impact analysis to understand security impacts of the target state.
Finally phased.
Implementation.
Governance encompasses general measures, security, audit and security training.
When it comes to security architectures, general measures provide assurance that the detailed design
and implemented processes and systems adhere to the overall enterprise security architecture.
The security audit includes security reviews for the implemented processes, technical designs, developed
code, and configurations against policies and requirements.
The security audit also includes functional security, performance and penetration testing.
Finally, the security training and awareness ensures correct deployment, configuration and operation
of the security relevant subsystem and components.
It is critical for a proper continuous and secure performance.

--- Exam preparation, time management, question analysis and answer selection ---

In this lesson, I would like to give you some advice and how to master the exam.
The lesson is divided into four parts.
Advices for your exam preparation.
Advices for time management.
Advices for question analysis and advices for answer selection.
Let's start with the general guidance for your exam preparation.
The first advice is to master the Toga specification.
The examination providers provide an electronically copy of the Toga fundamental content and the applicable
Toga series guides, accessible by selecting the reference buttons from within the exam.
Get familiar with the Table of Contents to quickly find the relevant information you need.
The second advice is to complete exam questions, test your toga of know how, and learn the structure
and specifics of the exam by completing as many scenario based questions as possible.
And the last advice for your exam preparation is to test on a real conditions.
Simulate a Toga exam with eight questions in 90 minutes.
Learn how to deal with challenging questions under time pressure.
With regard to your time management, you should consider the following force are constant pace.
As a native English speaker, you only have an average of 11 to 15 minutes to answer a question, skip
difficult questions and look for quick wins instead.
And use the complete time frame.
The devil is in the detail, especially with longer texts.
Use the remaining time for a quality check.
Start with the answers you feel most unsure about.
And extract the hard facts.
Scenarios, questions and answers often contain passages that are not necessary for a correct answer.
Highlight the valuable information and save time.
It is important for your exam success that you analyze the questions with razor sharp precision.
Start with small questions.
The longer a question is, the more time you need to analyze it.
Read the introductions and start with questions that contain a short description and read the questions
first.
The question text often consists of 2 to 3 short lines that indicate what you should pay attention in
the proposed answers and pay attention to key terms.
Torgoff.
Terms like concern, stakeholder or governance point to relevant faces, techniques or content of the
framework.
And last but not least, identify the ADM face.
Scenarios and questions often define the faces of the architecture development method.
Use this fact to recognize the relevant ADM steps.
Finally a treasure chest.
For selecting answers.
Stick to the toga spirit.
Choose the answer that is most in line with the toga standard.
Key concepts.
For instance, ADM inputs, outputs, steps, and approaches.
Sort out the distractor.
In most cases, one out of the four answers has nothing to do with the toga standard, and is very different
from other answers.
Find this fake answer and rule it out and look for similar answers.
For some questions, the best and second best answer are similar.
Choose the one that comes closest to the store of standard and address the concerns.
Make sure that your answer addresses all the concerns raised by the stakeholders in the question.
Bear in mind stakeholders decide on the architecture.

--- Wrap-up & Download Script ---

Thank you so much for taking this course to its very end.
We want to wrap up the Torgoth lessons with a quote on architecture by Augustus Pugin.
In pure architecture, the smallest detail should have a meaning or serve a purpose.
Before taking the TOGAF Enterprise Architecture Part two exam, we have some final recommendations.
Download the provided course material.
Go through each concept in detail with your own learning pace.
Focus on the learning goals required by the TOGAF Enterprise Architecture Practitioner Certification.
Get practice questions and prepare for your TOGAF exam.
And finally, the most important recommendation the exam is an open book exam.
And the toga fundamental content and the corresponding TOGAF series guide will be made available to
you.
Familiarize yourself with these original documents.
The table of contents is particularly valuable so that you know the content and structure of the documents.
This way you will know how to work with the documents in the exam, and how to find the content relevant
to the question.
That's all from our side.
We would be very pleased if you would let us know after the exam that you have also become a practitioner.
Good luck for your enterprise Architecture exam.

--- Thank you, discounts & grow with further Udemy courses ---

[No transcript available for this lecture]
